# THE SYMPHONIC DRUMMER

***What does it take to be able to play the drum set part in a symphonic
orchestra at a high artistic level?***

->Royal Conservatoire The Hague, The Netherlands, April 2020<-

->Student: Martin Ansink<-

->Instrument: Classical Percussion<-

->Student number: 0005777<-

->Supervisor: Marlon Titre<-

->Master Circle leader: Paul Craenen<-


## Preface

*When people ask me about my profession the next dialogue often occurs:*

*Me: 'I play timpani and percussion in the Residentie Orchestra, that's
a Symphonic Orchestra based in The Hague.'*

*Reply: 'Ah, so you are a drummer.'*

*Me: 'Well, no, not exactly. I can play a little bit of drums and do
sometimes play the drums in the orchestra. But I don't consider myself a
'real' drummer.'*

And then people look confused......

# Chapters 
 

* [1. Introduction](#introduction)

    - [Methodology](#methodology)

    - [Structure](#structure)

* [2. Reading Guide](#reading-guide)

* [3. History](#history)

    - [Origin of jazz music](#origin-of-jazz-music)

    - [Gershwin and Broadway](#gershwin-and-broadway)

    - [Symphonic Jazz](#symphonic-jazz)

    - [Bernstein and jazz](#bernstein-and-jazz)

    - [Other composers](#other-composers)

* [4. No business as usual](#no-business-as-usual)

    - [Limitation of available players](#limitation-of-available-players)

    - [Story](#story)

    - [Education](#education)

* [5. The major Triad](#the-major-triad)

    - [Conductor](#conductor)

    - [Trust](#trust)

    - [Orchestra](#orchestra)

    - [Tacit knowledge](#tacit-knowledge)

    - [Drummer](#drummer)

    - [Personal skills - It is not about you](#personal-skills---it-is-not-about-you)

    - [Musical skills - The Three T's](#musical-skills---the-three-ts)

    - [Technical Skills](#technical-skills)

    - [The triad in cooperation](#the-triad-in-cooperation)

* [6. Interpretation and preparation of parts](#interpretation-and-preparation-of-parts)

    - [Parts are unreliable](#parts-are-unreliable)

    - [Preparation: General](#preparation-general)

    - [Summary of the necessary technical and musical demands](#summary-of-the-necessary-technical-and-musical-demands)

    - [Gershwin](#gershwin)

    - [Bernstein](#bernstein)

    - [Variation in interpretation](#variation-in-interpretation)

    - [Tempo drops](#tempo-drops)

    - [On top or not](#on-top-or-not)

    - [Jim Gwin's interpretation](#_Toc38200917)

    - ['On the Town', Three Dance Episodes](#on-the-town-three-dance-episodes)

    - [Symphonic Dances from West Side Story:](#symphonic-dances-from-west-side-story)

* [7. Discussion](#discussion)

    - [Like no other](#like-no-other)

    - [How do the experts cope?](#how-do-the-experts-cope)

    - [Differences](#differences)

    - [My assumptions and changes](#my-assumptions-and-changes)

    - [Research into practice](#research-into-practice)

    - [Limitations](#limitations)

    - [Further research](#further-research)

    - [Recommendations](#recommendations)

* [8. Conclusion](#conclusion)

[Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

[Appendix A. Analysis of Parts Gershwin and Bernstein
44](#appendix-a.-analysis-of-parts-gershwin-and-bernstein)

[Appendix B. Analysis and Comparison of the drum parts as performed and
interpreted by the drummer on recordings from Bernstein.
51](#appendix-b.-analysis-and-comparison-of-the-drum-parts-as-performed-and-interpreted-by-the-drummer-on-recordings-from-bernstein.)

[Appendix C Musical skills 56](#appendix-c-musical-skills)

[Appendix D Personal skills 57](#appendix-d-personal-skills)

[Appendix E Technical skills 58](#appendix-e-technical-skills)

[Appendix F. Summary of the Master class by Jerry (Gerald) Scholl on
Drums in Orchestra.
59](#appendix-f.-summary-of-the-master-class-by-jerry-gerald-scholl-on-drums-in-orchestra.)

[Appendix G. My observations on rehearsals and concerts
61](#appendix-g.-my-observations-on-rehearsals-and-concerts)

[Appendix H. Interview Hans Leenders
63](#appendix-h.-interview-hans-leenders)

[Appendix I. Interview Marcel Serierse
65](#appendix-i.-interview-marcel-serierse)

[Appendix J. Interview Arie den Boer
69](#appendix-j.-interview-arie-den-boer)

[Appendix K. Interview Joost Gevers
72](#appendix-k.-interview-joost-gevers)

[Appendix L. Interview during lessons Jim Gwin
74](#appendix-l.-interview-during-lessons-jim-gwin)

[Bibliography 77](#_Toc38200943)

<a id="introduction">

# 1. Introduction  

The classic orchestral world is changing fast. Next to playing the
standard repertoire, all professional orchestras are expanding their
activities in search of innovative ways to connect with new and existing
audiences.

My orchestra, The Residentie Orchestra[^1], started with the Symphonic
Junction program in 'Het Paard' a few years ago. The Orchestra calls it:
'an exciting crossroad where Residentie Orchestra The Hague encounters
new artists, genres and audiences'.[^2]

In these programs, the orchestra collaborates with artists such as
Anneke van Giersbergen, Sven Figee, Farid Sheek, Phillipe Elan. And
bands like De Staat, Splendid, Spark and Peter Beets trio. Exploring all
different kinds of musical styles from jazz, French Chansons to World
music and Punk. For every concert there are arrangements of the artists
music made especially for this collaboration. It is a successful
cooperation and some of the live concerts are released on CD and other
media.

Due to these new activities, the percussionists in the orchestra are
faced with new repertoire which includes other than standard percussion
instruments.[^3] These instruments and their playing techniques create
new challenges. When performing new pieces, the orchestra also receive
emails from Living composers the orchestra collaborates with, like Julia
Wolff, demand that the percussionist/drummer is a high-level
contemporary-music specialist fluent on drum set and capable of reading
complicated rhythms. This combination of drum set and classical
percussion playing occurs more often than before and is not limited to
my orchestra. The Indianapolis Percussion section gave a clinic at the
PASIC17 about the nontraditional skills that orchestral percussionists
are increasingly called upon over the course of a typical season[^4]

The boundaries between the classic and band culture seem to fade. In my
orchestral percussion section, we have discussions on how to fill in
these new occurring issues in an artistically convincing manner. We are
not educated as drummers, even though some of us do play drum set and
the amount of ['real'](#reading-guide) drummers who can work with an
orchestra at a high artistic level are limited in the Netherlands. I
have played drum set parts with my orchestra and that felt most of the
time uncomfortable. When sitting next to a 'real' drummer playing with
my orchestra, it seemed some of the problems I encounter did not happen
with them. This made me curious about what it is they do or do not do to
make it work and led to my research question:

**What does it take to be able to play the drum set part in a symphonic
orchestra at a high artistic level?**

This led to some secondary questions.

-   What are alleged drum skills for drummers in a band?

-   Do they also apply when working with a symphonic orchestra?

-   How do the experts in the field cope with this?

-   How does this apply to commonly programmed Bernstein and Gershwin
    pieces?

With the answer to this question I hope to be able to lift my own
orchestral drum set playing to a higher level, and thus be able to
fulfill the role of the symphonic drummer in a better way. After
finishing this research, I will try to turn these results into an
educational module which can be added to the curriculum of
conservatories so the pool of competent orchestral drum set players can
grow.

During my search I have not encountered any research on the specific
relation between the drummer and conductors. This relation and
interaction seemed of great importance to achieve a high artistic level.
There is research on conductors and orchestras, and there are
biographies and books about conducting in general. These works discuss
the ways conductors approach working with orchestral musicians in
different sections. However, I have not found literature specifically
discussing how to work with drummers.

There is literature on classical percussion playing in the orchestra,
but no literature on interpretation and preparation of specific
orchestral drum parts. Therefore, I had to find an alternative way to
get information first hand by experienced musicians to get more insight
into this specific relationship.

## Methodology


The method I have chosen is a mix of different techniques. My first step
was to take drum lessons with an expert in the field. I got the chance
to work with Jim Gwin, he is the drummer of the Boston Pops Orchestra
(BPO).[^5] Since 2005 he is the permanent drummer of the BPO and drummer
in the Boston Esplanade Orchestra.[^6] In both orchestras he played drum
set in a lot of programs with a variety of styles, musicians and
conductors. Next to this he is a teacher at New England Conservatory
(NEC) in Boston[^7]. At NEC he teaches drum set to the classical
percussion department, preparing them to play drum set in general and
specifically on the parts which occur in the BPO programs.

I visited him in Boston and took lessons where we worked on the parts of
Symphonic Dances of West Side Story and On the Town, three dance
episodes and some overall drum skills. He invited me to watch a rhythm
section (Piano, Guitar, Bass, Drums) and full orchestra rehearsal. The
next day I listened to the corresponding concert of the BPO[^8]. During
the lessons I interviewed[^9] him and we reflected on how Jim approaches
parts and how he deals with the soloist, conductor and the
orchestra.[^10] These lessons and interviews were of great importance
for my research. Drum parts give limited information so there is room
for the drummer to interpret the part. Hearing the experts'
interpretation and working on the drum parts myself would give me an
in-depth insight in what is technically and musically needed to perform
these in a symphonic orchestral setting.

I interviewed other experienced drummers and conductors who are
frequently asked to conduct and play these collaborative programs. I
observed them while rehearsing and performing with an orchestra and
interviewed them about their approach and insights. Next to technical
and musical demands we spoke about the personal skills a drummer would
need. In this way the specific relation between the conductor, drummer
and orchestra could be put into words. Out of a book on the role of the
drummer I extracted a list of personal, technical and musical skills a
professional drummer would need according to his fellow musicians. This
list was used as a guideline to compare and complete the role of the
drummer in a band in relation to role of the drummer in a symphonic
setting.

When talking to the drummers it became clear that they relied heavily on
historic knowledge of the 'greats'.[^11] Enabling them to deliver the
right sound, feel and groove for every piece. I reviewed literature and
searched for a relation between the development of drums to the time
period of Gershwin and Bernstein. This happens to be the time where jazz
and symphonic music started to merge.

Creating a list of symphonic orchestral pieces which contained drum
parts made it clear that I had to make a choice to give focus to this
research. The list of parts, specific drum rhythms and their specific
techniques would be endless if all the crossovers and musical styles
symphonic orchestras are exploring would be taken into account.

I decided to limit the list to pieces by Gershwin and Bernstein and
analyzed these to find out which rhythms the drummer must be able to
play. These pieces are commonly programmed in orchestral seasons. My own
experience with these would help to understand the inner works of
performing these drum part more thoroughly than going into the
endlessness of al styles.

By analyzing recordings of major orchestras I extracted how their
drummers interpreted the parts and find out if there would be some
common ground. Combining this information would lead me to an answer to
my research question.

## Structure

At the end of my research are twelve appendixes with analysis of
recordings, parts and interpretations by drummers. Interviews with
expert drummers and conductors and elaborations of rehearsal and concert
observations. All these appendixes are of great importance because they
give insight in the inner works of playing drum set and all other things
a drummer encounters when performing with a conductor and an orchestra.
I refer frequently to these observations and interviews in [*chapter
5*](#the-major-triad), [*chapter
6*](#interpretation-and-preparation-of-parts) and my Discussion
[*chapter 7*](#discussion).

Especially for the drummers and percussionists: It is worth reading
them!

[*Appendix A*](#appendix-a.-analysis-of-parts-gershwin-and-bernstein) is
an analysis of the drum parts used in Gershwin and Bernstein pieces. It
contains a short description of the drum part, the sheet music and links
to the corresponding video and/or audio fragments. A summary of the
required technical and musical skills can be found in [*chapter
6*](#interpretation-and-preparation-of-parts).

In [*Appendix
B*](#appendix-b.-analysis-and-comparison-of-the-drum-parts-as-performed-and-interpreted-by-the-drummer-on-recordings-from-bernstein.)
are different recordings of 'On the Town' and 'West Side Story'. The
drum parts and their interpretation by the drummers are analyzed and
compared to see if there is common ground on interpretation. If drummers
deviated from the part, I made notes of what is different. General
remarks on recordings and the drum part can also to be found here.

In [*Appendix C*](#appendix-c-musical-skills), Musical skills [*Appendix
D*](#appendix-d-personal-skills) Personal skills and [*Appendix
E*](#appendix-e-technical-skills) Technical skills for drummers are
extracted out of a book called: "The Drummer's role" by Jose Duque.[^12]
This book contains a section with a series of interviews with many
musicians and producers giving their views on what the role of the
drummer should be and how they approach situations when working with
drummers in the studio or live. It is written with 'real' drummers in
mind and does not apply one to one for drummers in a symphonic
orchestral setting. I used this extraction as a guideline in [*chapter
5*](#the-major-triad) to compare and add what came out of the
interviews. In this way I completed the picture of where the two worlds
meet or deviate.

[*Appendix
F*](#appendix-f.-summary-of-the-master-class-by-jerry-gerald-scholl-on-drums-in-orchestra.)
and [*appendix
G*](#appendix-g.-my-observations-on-rehearsals-and-concerts) contain
observations. They describe a masterclass I attended on drums in an
orchestral setting. And observations of rehearsals and concerts by the
drummers and conductors I interviewed.

When working with an orchestra, the drummer has to work with a classical
conductor. This is something a drummer does not encounter in other
settings. Big bands do have a conductor/leader but that does not work in
the same way as the classical approach, as Abel Mark convincingly
explains in his work.[^13] For this reason I also interviewed classical
conductors who worked with drummers in an orchestral setting.[^14] I
wanted to know what their expectation of the role of the drummer is and
how they approach and prepare these situations. They have worked with
both classical percussionists who played drum parts and with 'real'
drummers playing the drum parts.

[*Appendix H*](#appendix-h.-interview-hans-leenders) Hans Leenders
conductor, [*Appendix I*](#appendix-i.-interview-marcel-serierse) Marcel
Serierse drummer, [*Appendix J*](#appendix-j.-interview-arie-den-boer)
Arie den Boer drummer, [*Appendix
K*](#appendix-k.-interview-joost-gevers) Joost Gevers conductor and
[*Appendix L*](#appendix-l.-interview-during-lessons-jim-gwin) Jim Gwin
drummer BPO, are the written interviews with these expert conductors and
drummers.

After the [*Introduction*](#introduction) and [*Reading
Guide*](#reading-guide) the research starts with the History [*Chapter
3*](#history): The interviewed drummers gave great importance to the
history of the drum set and their drummers. To be able to play in style
you have to know where it derives from. I made a connection with the
evolution of drums and connect them with the timeframe of Gershwin and
Bernstein. In this way we can have a better understanding of
interpretations in specific parts.

In [*Chapter 4*](#no-business-as-usual) I reflect on my own experience
when playing drums in the orchestra and, in a broader sense, how the
research question is related to my everyday work. From the decision
making process when dealing with these 'hybrid' parts to the education
in the Netherlands and the limited number of capable drummers who can
function with an orchestra.

In [*Chapter 5*](#the-major-triad) the main characters appear. The
Conductor, the Orchestra and the Drummer.

Their individual role is first discussed separately and the next section
shows how interdependent they are to make it all work.

[*Chapter 6*](#interpretation-and-preparation-of-parts) is the part
about the parts. How can and how do drummers prepare and interpret their
parts? It includes a summary of the technical and musical demands the
drummer needs to perform Gershwin and Bernstein parts. It also contains
an interesting section on how Jim Gwin approaches 'On the Town' and
'West Side Story'.

This all leads to [*Chapter 7*](#discussion) Discussion. My major
findings are put in perspective here. How this research process changed
my playing and recommendations for the sector.

In *[Chapter 8](#conclusion)* Conclusion you find the answer of my
research question.

# 2. Reading Guide

*'Real' Drummer: *

*Someone who is an educated and experienced drummer. Able to perform in
band settings.*

*Groove related music:*

*With groove related music I mean pop, jazz, fusion related songs. Music
with an ongoing steady pulse.*

*Symphonic based, symphonic jazz:*

*Music from the symphonic repertoire, including Gershwin and Bernstein.*

*The 'greats':*

*Historically important drummers who developed and shaped the evolution
of drums.*

# 3. History

An extraction of advice given to me during the interviews:

"Listen to the legends of the early years. Zutty Singleton, Baby Doods,
papa Joe Jones, Shelly Manne."

"When I studied I researched who played. The Steve Gadd's, Vinnie
Colaiuta's and Dave Weckel's. Where did they get their inspiration
from?. How did it sound back then?"

"Gene Krupa, He play's underneath, but so strong."

"Shuffle like Bernard Purdie."

All interviewed drummers were very aware and studied the sound and way
the 'greats' played their drums and applied this knowledge to interpret
the drum parts they encountered when playing drums in the symphonic
orchestra.

Because the drummer is the so-called expert in the field of interpreting
the drum parts it is necessary to have an understanding of the historic
tradition and development of the drum set. In this section I focus on
the connection of the development of drums to Gershwin and Bernstein.
Starting from the origin of jazz music in and around Saint Louis and its
connection to Gershwin and Broadway. Through the development of the
swing era and the connection with studio musicians and Bernstein.

## Origin of jazz music

*Ragtime* was born in the African-American communities of St. Louis in
the 1890's. This style takes traditional march form, much like the music
of John Philip Sousa, and adds the syncopated, or "ragged", rhythms of
African music.[^15] The instruments that the early jazz drummers used
were quite different than we currently use. Originated in marching
culture the section consisted of two percussionists, one snare drum
player and one bass drum player.[^16] After the invention of the bass
drum pedal in 1894 or 1895 by "Dee Dee "Chandler this could be performed
by one player. In 1894 William F. Ludwig used a wooden heel pedal when
playing with dance bands.[^17] Some players also still retained to
double drumming, where the side and bass drum were played simultaneously
by hand.[^18]

Warren "Baby" Dodds is considered one of the first great jazz drummers
in history. He started working in marching bands in New Orleans. Joined
the Fate Marable's riverboat band in 1918 where he met Louis
Armstrong.[^19] The style of playing of the early drummers was at first
very military-oriented, and used an assorted variety of rolls, flares,
ruffs, and other

rudiments. They didn\'t maintain the beat on the cymbals, but used both
sticks upon the snare drum, blocks, and rims for the most part[^20]. We
do know that a drum solo was only rarely played in early jazz. Zutty
Singleton recalls that the drummer played a subsidiary role: \"We just
kept the rhythm going and hardly ever took a solo."[^21]

!{image1}

*Dixieland* had his heydays in the 1920 and was also called hot jazz or
New Orleans Style and spread from New Orleans to Chicago and New York.
The forerunner of the hi-hat, the so called snowshoe, was invented, and
could produce a short staccato or longer splash sound.[^22] Chicago
Style drummers experimented with cymbals and bass drums. They allowed
cymbals to ring, instead of choking them as been done in Ragtime.[^23]
In these days the first jazz recorded was recorded by an orchestra of
white musicians called the Original Dixieland Jass Band.

First Jazz recording 1917 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5WojNaU4-kI>

## Gershwin and Broadway

In this period Dave Tough and Gene Krupa came out of Chicago and later
settled in New York. They were greatly influenced by Dodds. Gene Krupa
played in the Red Nichols Orchestra which was the pit band for the 1927
musical Strike up the Band and Girl Crazy by George Gershwin.[^24] This
pit band also contained great jazz musicians like Benny Goodman and Glen
Miller. Gene Krupa had an explosive style of playing and soloing and his
influence in the evolution of drumming is almost immeasurable. He is
responsible for popularizing the instrument. Due to him, drums and
drummers moved from the back of the band into a position of
prominence.[^25]

Davey Tough made the greatest impact when playing in the Woody Herman
band.

For the swing feel of the first movement of 'On the Town three dance
episodes' by Gershwin, Jim Gwin referred to the recording of Apple Honey
by Woody Herman and his Orchestra.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pjI2_exu9AM>

## Symphonic Jazz

In 1922 Gershwin wrote Blue Monday, orchestrated by Will Vodery. [^26]

Blue Monday (Opera à la Afro-American) was the original name of a
one-act \"jazz [opera](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opera)\" renamed
135th Street during a later production. Though a short piece, with a
running time of between twenty and thirty minutes, Blue Monday is often
considered the blueprint to many of Gershwin\'s later works, and is
often considered to be the \"first piece of
[symphonic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orchestra)
[jazz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jazz).\"[^27] In that it was the
first significant attempt to fuse forms of [classical
music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_classical_music) such as
opera with American [popular
music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popular_music), with the opera
largely influenced by [Jazz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jazz) and the
[African-American
culture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_culture) of
[Harlem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harlem).

*Blue Monday* was one of Gershwin\'s premature works and lacks the
musical and dramatic sophistication of his later musicals and *Porgy and
Bess*, but [jazz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jazz) conductor [Paul
Whiteman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Whiteman), who conducted
the original performance of the piece in 1922, was so impressed by it
that he asked Gershwin to compose a symphonic jazz piece for Whiteman to
conduct at a concert Whiteman was planning. The resulting piece,
\"[Rhapsody in Blue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhapsody_in_Blue),\"
became Gershwin\'s most famous composition.[^28]

## Bernstein and jazz


As Bernstein himself explains in 'The world of Jazz by Bernstein'
broadcasted October 16, 1955 on ABC, he is influenced by jazz music and
starts writing a concert piece for jazz band called Prelude, Fugue ad
Riffs.[^29] This piece requires for a 'real' big band style drumming.

**Prelude, Fugue and Riffs (1949) was** completed in 1949 for [Woody
Herman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woody_Herman)\'s [big
band](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_band) as part of a series of
commissioned works -- that already included
[Stravinsky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Igor_Stravinsky)\'s [*Ebony
Concerto*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebony_Concerto_(Stravinsky)).

This video of the piece features Sol Gubin on drums. A drummer who
worked as a hardcore jazz player working with Bill Evans and Wes
Montgomery. And in the Studio scene.

The original sound track recording of West Side Story of 1961 features
Shelly Manne on drums.[^30] He was a top studio musician performed
hundreds of movie soundtracks and commercials. Shelly Manne developed
his style playing in New York clubs in the late 30's and 40's and became
well known in the late 40's and 50's for his performances with the big
bands of Woody Herman and Stan Kenton. He listened to Jo Jones, Dave
Tough, Buddy Rich, Sid Catlett and Gene Krupa.[^31]

## Other composers

In this time period there are more classical composers influenced by
jazz. This is a short list of pieces.

Milhaud - La Création du monde
[Op.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opus_number) 81a(1922-23), premiere
25 October 1923 at [Théâtre des
Champs-Élysées](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Th%C3%A9%C3%A2tre_des_Champs-%C3%89lys%C3%A9es)
in Paris.

Antheil - Jazz symphony (1925) premiere 1927 Carnegie Hall 

Seiber - Jazzolets (1928),For 2 saxophones, trumpet, trombone, piano,
bass, and drums 1929 and 1932

nr 1:
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QpTeAW1sIiw]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QpTeAW1sIiw)

nr 2:
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPZZ2vFlIb4]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPZZ2vFlIb4)

And composers write pieces that have a collaboration of jazz band and
Symphony orchestra's:

Seiber - Improvisations for Jazz Band and Symphony Orchestra (1959) 

By Mátyás Seiber and John Dankworth, performed by the Johnny Dankworth
Band and London Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Hugo Rignold.

[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwUXqkWbm0w]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwUXqkWbm0w)

Rolf Lieberman - Concerto for Jazz Band and Orchestra (1954)

written for the 1954 Donaueschingen Festival

# 4. No business as usual

In my orchestra, where I normally play timpani and percussion, I have
been playing drum set parts in the orchestra on a few occasions. While
playing drum set I noticed this felt completely different to me than
playing 'normal' percussion or timpani parts. A lot of those times being
insecure about the sounding artistic level and searching how to approach
the role and function of the drummer and the interpretation of the
parts. Working with a symphonic orchestra and a conductor is 'business
as usual' for me but apparently not in relation to the drum parts.

There was a constant push and pull going on with the orchestra that did
not feel comfortable and did not match my expectations of the role of
the drummer.

I thought that the drummer should be given the authority to be the main
player in charge of timekeeping and the orchestra and conductor should
be listening and therefore there would be no push and pull going on.
With [groove related](#reading-guide) music time should be a straight
line and tempi should not vary. When I play important and leading parts
on percussion or timpani in symphonic repertoire this push and pull is
also going on. But in these cases do not feel as uncomfortable and, in
my opinion, do not get in the way of the flow or musical function.

The other difficult thing was to do justice to the pieces and get the
overall groove, feel and time up to the right artistic level. For me it
did not matter if it was groove related or more [symphonic based
music](#reading-guide). On a number of occasions I had the chance to
play together, and watch 'real' drummers work with my orchestra as well.
The sounding result was not always the same. Some high level drum
players had much difficulty adapting to seemingly a new experience for
them as well. Getting into what felt as a 'battle' with the orchestra
and the conductor. Other drummers had little to none difficulty and were
doing a great job. Playing in demand, with great feel and sound and able
to 'control' the orchestra. I wanted to know what made them so good and
what could I, and other drummers and percussionists learn from them. So
when we get the chance to play these parts we can do a great job as
well.

As you can read in the Preface story, many people think that being a
drummer or a classical percussionist is the same job. In this research I
make a clear distinction between a drummer and a classical orchestral
percussion player. They are two different professions with their own
separate Bachelor and Master study. A classical orchestral percussionist
is able to play all the parts and instruments which occur in a symphonic
orchestra, solo or ensembles. And a drummer is someone who plays drum
set. This can be in different ensemble settings.

In my research these two worlds meet.

## Limitation of available players

When the orchestra receives new parts for the upcoming concert, the
principal percussionist is in charge of dividing parts between the
players. And at first it is his responsibility to make a judgment call
based upon the parts and listening to the original music whether to ask
or not to ask for a drummer. When dealing with hybrid parts, common
practice in my orchestra is to let a classical percussionist with a bit
of drum experience perform the parts.[^32] That is because having
experience playing under a baton and having feel for orchestral playing
and orchestral timing is preferred. The percussionist will also be able
to perform other programmed pieces that need classical percussion
playing. Another option is to get two players for the (one?) job. A
drummer for the drum sections and a classical percussionist for the
other part. 

There is a limited number of drummers in the Netherlands who are able to
play these real drum parts. And even less who can do semi and hybrid
drum parts at a high level. They are in high demand when such programs
occur.

## Story

During this research I talked to many other percussionists and drummers.
Two stories by Jim Gwin, the drummer of the Boston Pops Orchestra (BPO)
are showing this is not only a Dutch problem.

When Fred Buda, the former drummer of the Boston Pops retired, Jim Gwin
was already playing with the BPO. Sometimes as a substitute classical
percussionist and sometimes as the substitute drummer. When faced with
the challenge to find a new drummer, the orchestra thought to let Jim
take over the drum seat since he was doing a great job over the last few
years. Hearing about the job opening there were a lot of very good
drummers, most of them playing in musicals, sending letters to the
orchestra that they want to take a shot to play for the job. The
orchestra held an audition and a few players got do a trial and play
some programs with the BPO. Although the players were really good
drummers with a lot of experience it didn't work together with a
symphonic orchestra. And they gave the position to Jim.

On my question: 'Who do you ask as a substitute when you are not able to
play.'

He answered: 'I make sure I can play. Sometimes when there is a schedule
clash with the Boston Esplanade Orchestra\*, where I am also the
drummer, we ask a guy from New York to come in and play.' Which is
amazing to me because of all the good drummers coming from Boston. I
would have thought with the amount of drummers studying at Berklee
College of Music[^33] and New England Conservatory[^34] there would be
at least a few drummers able to do this.

## Education

Not in all of the classical percussion curricula at the Dutch
conservatories[^35] drum set or world percussion training is standard
included in the program. Sometimes there is an option of taking it as a
subsidiary subject into your own study program. Most drummers do have
snare drum technique lessons included. And occasionally, for those who
are interested, vibraphone lessons. There is a growing awareness that
drum set training should be included. I spoke with J. William Hudgings,
percussion teacher at New England Conservatory, percussionist of the
Boston Symphony Orchestra and the Boston Pops. He is planning on
changing the mandatory curriculum so drum lessons for classical
percussion students at NEC are being expanded from one to two years.

The drummers I interviewed and spoke to and are doing this at a high
level had different backgrounds. Jim Gwin followed a complete classical
education with a degree. Arie den Boer partially followed a classical
conservatory education and then turned to drums. And Marcel Serierse
only had basic classical snare drum lessons when he started to play
drums at a young age.

# 5. The major Triad

To make it possible to achieve the best sounding result there has to be
a co-creation between these three main characters. Everyone has his own
specific role to play but if the cooperation is not good, the end result
will not be optimal. 

![knipsel driehoek major
triade.png](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image2.png){width="3.5213254593175853in"
height="1.8127526246719161in"}

!{image2}

In the next section I focus on the specific role of every character and
their interaction.

## Conductor


We see the conductor as the leader of the orchestra. The primary
responsibilities of the conductor are to unify performers, set the
tempo, execute clear preparations and beats, listen critically and shape
the sound of the ensemble, and to control the interpretation and pacing
of the music.[^36]

Koivunen (2003) gives a good picture of how orchestras and conductors
relate:[^37]

-   "conductors maybe among the most undemocratic leaders in the world.
    The job description of a conductor is indeed quite extraordinary:
    conductors are totalitarian leaders. They do not discuss tempo,
    phrasings or articulation with the orchestra or with individual
    players. They decide if the orchestra is going to play louder or
    quieter, whether the tempo is too slow, or whether a particular
    instrument is too dominant. Nobody is in a position to question
    their orders. If a musician speaks with a conductor in rehearsal, it
    is only to ask further advice. If the orchestra wishes to address
    the conductor, it is the concert master's duty to do so. Conductors
    decide everything down to the smallest detail in rehearsals and
    concerts. They decide which parts need extra rehearsing (Nordström,
    1997: 110)"

When playing groove related music, the drummer takes over some of the
primary responsibilities of the conductor. Some of the leadership is
transferred to the drummer and that calls for an open mind and a
co-creational spirit. A lot of conductors are not as specialized in the
finesses of the groove, timing and styles of the pieces as the drummer.
But [Hans Leenders](#appendix-h.-interview-hans-leenders), a conductor
who has a background in classical percussion said he \'knows\' if a
drummer sounds like a real drummer or not.

### Trust

One of the main things that came out of the interviews was the word:
'Trust'. The conductor has to trust that the drummer is able to pull it
off. A good drummer will make his life much easier because he takes over
the responsibility of the timekeeping part. Not having to be the
timekeeper himself the conductor can focus on all the other things
mentioned above. Conductors have to deal with difference in the moment
of sound production between a woodwind player and a percussion
instrument. Wind players can sound late and therefore sound not together
with the drums even though they all think they are playing on time. By
taking a position and guide the orchestra towards the drummer can help
to get the two together.

The interviewed conductors adjust their gestures to help to get the
timing together especially with groove related music. Gestures give room
for interpretation and are not as clear as a count-in. Counting-in can
work very well if the piece starts directly with the groove. And is
preferred by musicians used to groove related music. Counting in gives
greater accuracy for the first note and a better indication for the
tempo.[^38] With most of the Gershwin and Bernstein pieces it is not
possible to do a count-in. Entrances derive directly from a previous
part and are also not always related in tempo. There can be a rubato or
rallentando just before the next drum entrance.

## Orchestra

Depending on the works that are played the group of musicians can vary a
lot. Bernstein and Gershwin pieces ask for a full orchestra and the
number of musicians can be up to 80. This requires a big stage and most
of the times also a big concert hall. Which has its effect on audibility
between the different groups. But an orchestra does not only contain of
musicians and a conductor. There are also management and production
members. There is an artistic team who are in charge of programming and
contracting soloists and conductors. For some programs artistic teams
invite arrangers to make an arrangement especially for the occasion. And
sometimes for a limited amount of players. This can be a smaller group
because of musical choice, but sometimes also for cost reduction or
limited available space on the concert location. When my orchestra, The
Residentie Orchestra, plays in Paard the Hague, the stage is small and
we play with a limited strings sections and single woodwind and brass
section players. Some of these programs are groove related and require a
drummer. Sometimes that will be the drummer from the band we happen to
play with and on other occasions the orchestra provides a drummer.

If the orchestra provides a drummer they make a decision who to ask to
play the drums set part. And decide if there is need for a complete
professional band consisting of drums, guitar, bass and piano. For
groove related music it is preferable to get a good rhythm section so
the original song can be matched. A limiting factor in this decision
making is that the biggest part of the organization does not have the
right frame of reference to determine if a complete band is needed. They
hopefully ask for help and info or leave the decision with the
percussion players or the drummer. When playing with a symphonic
orchestra a drummer faces some different challenges than playing with a
band. He needs to have some classical symphonic orchestral
musician/percussionist skills.

A classical percussionist is able to follow a conductor and move along
with 'orchestral timing'. You work in an environment where it can be
more difficult to hear all the musicians clearly and without delay. Much
of this is due to the [acoustic](#acoustics)s of the concert hall and/or
physical distance between all the players. When playing the classical
repertoire symphony orchestras normally work without amplification.
Being aware of what is happening around you and knowing how to
anticipate is key? It's a game of knowing where the timing is, how to
adapt, take initiative and make sure the end result sounds well. This
requires great listening skills.

Koivunen (2002): [^39]

-   "My data from symphony orchestras suggest that musicians are experts
    in listening. They have a unique talent of listening and responding,
    following, it is an essential part of their profession. They know
    how to interpret the conductor's gestures and mimics, and listen to
    the sound and adjust their own playing to that. Musicianship
    requires highly developed skills in concentration, listening,
    responding and adaptation. In addition to the craft of playing
    itself, one has to develop a nearly intuition-like skill in
    following the conductor, notes, listening and watching the concert
    master, principal players and fellow players, all this
    simultaneously. The players admit that this process includes some
    almost mystical elements that they are unable to explicate. That is
    clearly an example of tacit knowledge (Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995).
    How can the musicians make sense out of the huge amount of impulses
    that exist when a symphony orchestra is playing? To whom should one
    listen to and how? There seems to be two alternative ways of sense
    making in the orchestra. The other alternative is based on watching
    the conductor carefully and following his signs and gestures. The
    other alternative consists of listening to one's own playing and to
    fellow players sound. Naturally, these approaches can overlap and do
    overlap in an ideal situation"

### Tacit knowledge

For drummers who did not work with an orchestra before it can help if
they understand some of the unwritten rules or called tacit knowledge in
symphonic orchestras. As a young classical musicians you are hopefully
guided or mentored by your teacher when entering the classical
orchestral world. You learn what not to do, like practicing loud cymbal
crashes before a rehearsal or concert. Like this article about becoming
a professional musician describes.

-   "Tacit learning from Sinfonia participation with others versus focus
    on explicit learning from a teacher at Music School Tacit learning
    describes a form of knowing where 'we know more than we can tell'
    (Polanyi 1983). It contributes to the notion that the enactment of
    practice is often more an art than science (Duguid 2005; von Krogh,
    Ichijo and Nonaka 2000), that exposes practitioners to the unwritten
    protocols of practice and ways of behaving appropriately within an
    organisational or cultural context. As Cody reveals: I feel there's
    \... two main parts of being a professional orchestral musician. The
    first is obviously musical and the second would be etiquette.
    \[With\] musical, you learn ... what kinds of articulation are
    needed, what kind of approach to rhythm is needed in an orchestra,
    how to interpret Principals, Principal Players, conductors and
    concertmasters. How to interpret the difference between how one
    section of the orchestra interprets something ... \[especially as\]
    a rank-and-file player, you have to be able to follow what's been
    understood. \[Also, the\] stylistic approach to music changes within
    the city, within the country and you have to be aware of all these
    different stylistic approaches. \[Then\] the etiquette that comes
    with playing in an orchestra is just as important because obviously
    there's a hierarchy of older players who need to be respected and
    expect you to respect their ways of doing things. And they want you
    to learn; at the same time, they want you to learn the way they've
    done it. And yes definitely not tread on anyone's toes, which means
    not playing before anyone, not playing while people are speaking, to
    take it seriously but at the same time, not to be stiff so-to-speak.
    And that's not hard to learn, that's more ... just filtered into
    you, you know; the way you behave. And the younger you are, it seems
    that you haven't quite learned that yet, it's a maturity \[thing\]
    ... I think when I was younger, I probably annoyed a lot of people
    ... you're not meant to play concertos and things while you're
    warming up ... you're not meant to look like you're showing off
    \[so\] it's all about humility really. Further, music-mediated
    communication appears to require embodied competence (Beckett 2008);
    it requires actively using all the human senses rather than the
    frequent pedagogic talk that is more common at Music School."( Paul
    Hager and Mary C. Johnssona 2009^)^[^40]

## Drummer


In the [Appendix C](#appendix-c-musical-skills) Musical, [Appendix
D](#appendix-d-personal-skills) Personal and [Appendix
E](#appendix-e-technical-skills) Technical skill, you can find an
extraction of the skills other musicians thought necessary for drummers.
It is collected and summarized out of a book which contains an interview
section with many musicians and producers giving their view on what the
role of the drummer should be and how they approach situations when
working with drummers in the studio or live shows.[^41] I use this
extraction as a guideline in the next section and compare and add what I
got out of my observations and interviews.

### Personal skills - It is not about you

The drummer has a big responsibility which is not matched by any other
instrument in the orchestra. You take over some of the conductor\'s
role, like setting up tempo's and being the time keeper. Therefore, the
drummer has to be confident and self aware to play with authority. You
have to be in demand with your playing but also flexible and able to
adapt to a conductor and your surroundings. In the right circumstances
the drummer is given the responsibility to take his role by the
conductor.

Interesting to see was that all interviewed drummers said it is not
about them. They surrender their ego and try to get into the music no
matter what. But just for the higher goal of music. Make everybody,
orchestra and/or soloist play better and make them happy. Problems
related to music are addressed.

When you are a professional drummer it is sometimes required to have
your own trademark in playing. When working with an orchestra there is
no need for this. Especially with the more symphonic based music of
Bernstein and Gershwin.

#### Listening

One of the most important skill you need is the skill of listening. The
most important thing is how you sound with the orchestra. Open up your
ears will help you adapt to your surroundings. Be concerned about what
you play yourself but technically you should be able to play on
autopilot so you can focus on what is going on around you. This will
make you blend with the orchestra.

An inspiring example of good listening practices is given by Marie Jo
Hatch who has studied jazz music and jazz musicians.[^42]

-   Other scholars have also find jazz orchestras fruitful for studying
    improvisation or creative organization forms (Bougon et al. 1977;
    Barrett 2000). According to Hatch, in an ideal situation each
    musician listens to all other players all the time they are
    performing a tune. However, many musicians admit that they reach
    this ideal very seldom, only at the peak moments of jazz
    performance. At other times, the musicians concentrate on listening
    to one or two fellow players intensely. Thus, there is always
    somebody listening to the player who is contributing. Most
    importantly, the best listening and responding involves noticing how
    others are listening and responding to you. The better the listening
    and responding, the greater the music sounds. (Koivunen 2002)

#### Professionalism

There are so many really good drummers. It seems obvious but for being
asked again for another gig you have to leave a positive feeling with
the people involved. From your direct colleagues to management, sound
engineers and production. Have your instruments in order, be on time, be
well dressed and communicate in a pleasant way.

Being prepared is a key element.

#### Communication

Because the drummer sometimes take over the role of the conductor the
channels of communication should be wide open. If things are not working
out musically you have to address the issue. The drummer is probably the
most experienced in his area. Especially when it comes to getting the
right tempo and feel of the piece. Being to dominant in your opinions
because of this expertise can create a clash. In the end it is the
conductor who is responsible for the sounding result. Communication is a
two way street so you have to welcome input also. I noticed that the
drummers had frequent eye contact with the conductors especially with
every new transition in the song.

#### Great memory or good reader

There is no need for a great memory when performing with orchestras. It
is better to be a good reader because all the music, repeats and other
information is written in the parts. Flexibility during the performance
is not a forte of symphonic orchestras. They are not used to work with
hand signals or adjust to, for instance, a singer who comes in at a
wrong moment or want to repeat an ending. Orchestras rely mainly on the
repeats and structure of the given parts.

#### Inventive/Creative

The creative part is particularly during the preparation phase. Parts or
charts are only giving the basic information about what to play.
Especially with new arrangements it can be a challenge to recreate
things you hear on the original songs. There are sometimes tambourine,
triangle or other overdubs. Things you cannot be done by one player. The
drummer has to find a way to come up with something that feels similar
to the original.

The Gershwin and Bernstein songs have parts which are more written out
but also contain a lot of interpretable sections.

#### Energy

Not addressed specifically by the interviewees but can be added to
communication and support the song, provide the right emotional peaks.

#### Patience

Not addressed specifically by the interviewees.

#### Extra: Preparation 

This can be part of professionalism. But the importance of being
prepared is so big I gave it an extra place in this list. The drummer is
most preferably, and most probably is, the expert on how to interpret
the drum part. With a lot of groove related, in combination with
orchestras, programs you deal with new arrangements. And the provided
charts are mostly just a guide. This means that parts have to be prepare
really well before the first rehearsal starts. Listening to original
recordings to know the right tempo of the song, the right feel and style
so the drummer can match the original sound of the record. This
preparation will make the drummer able to play with authority and
conviction. When songs or arrangements are new to the interviewed
drummers, they make a Spotify list of the original songs and listen to
them frequently so they get the right tempos and feel for the songs.
This preparation will able the drummer to still be flexible and also to
lead and keep the orchestra together and tight.

### Musical skills - The Three T's

*'Just because you are not a drummer, doesn\'t mean that you don't have
to keep time'.*

From Thelonious Monk's notebook: [^43]

#### Time

This seems to be the most important skill for a drummer.

The book: The Big Band Drummer by Ron Spagnard has the following section
to describe the challenge when keeping time: [^44]

-   'Maintaining accurate, solid time is the first and foremost
    responsibility of a big band drummer. Nothing destroys the overall
    musicality of an arrangement more than a drummer who rushes or drags
    the tempo. Big band drummers face an ever greater challenge than
    small-group drummers, due primarily to the larger number of
    musicians in a big band. In a big band situation, certain entire
    sections (saxes, trumpets, trombones) may have a tendency to rush or
    drag the time. Keeping it all under control when dealing with
    fourteen to eighteen musicians at the same time can be a formidable
    task for any drummer.'

With bigger groups like a symphonic orchestra this is even amplified.

With groove related music within the orchestral setting the timekeeping
responsibility should be given to the drummer by the conductor"
.According to conductor Hans Leenders there are passages in *Gershwin
and Bernstein pieces where* time is more flexible and the drummer and
conductor should find each other. For instance the four pitched drum
solos at the beginning of the Symphonic Dances from West Side Story.

#### Taste

When performing with an orchestra the drummer encounters a lot of
different music. The variety of styles are limitless and therefore
require him to be able to perform all styles to a certain acceptable
artistic level. There are not many drummers who can do that.

The drummer has to choose his grooves and fills wisely. The advice given
by [Gerald
Scholl](#appendix-f.-summary-of-the-master-class-by-jerry-gerald-scholl-on-drums-in-orchestra.)
is to use the K.I.S.S. system: Keep It Simple Stupid. Acoustically it
can be a challenge to hear everything clearly and classical musicians
are not that used to work with drummers. Being to creative with the
fills can result in wrong entrances by the orchestra. A well placed fill
or upbeat can help the orchestra to start at the right moment. You can
hear an example of that in the [solo jazz
break](#appendix-b.-analysis-and-comparison-of-the-drum-parts-as-performed-and-interpreted-by-the-drummer-on-recordings-from-bernstein.)
of the Fugue in Symphonic Dances from West Side Story.[^45]

The groove has to be easy to follow and will help the orchestra to lock
in with you. Providing a good ride for everybody.

The drummer has to be able to blend his sound in the orchestra. This
requires him to play soft but preferably with good sound. This can be a
challenge when the music calls for a 'Metal' sound and style. But you
still have to match the orchestra volume and play with intention. As
[Arie den Boer](#appendix-j.-interview-arie-den-boer) stated: "Playing
soft is an art in itself"

Plexiglas screens can be used to protect the ears of other musicians. It
happens that orchestral musicians protect their ears by using earplugs
or walk away if you play too loud.

This does not help them to be aware and responsive to the drummers
playing.

#### Tone

Great sound is closely related to taste. The drummer needs to choose his
set up wisely. The variety of musical styles and the venue you play in
can make it hard to choose a setup. In the same program you can
encounter a metal based song and a jazz song. This would require a
different tuning of the drums. There is no time to change and retune
between songs so the drummer needs to find something that can do all.
Great sound is achieved by good technique. 

### Technical Skills

The symphonic drummer has to be a good reader and able to interpret drum
charts. But should also be able to read classically notated rhythms and
irregular time signatures. The drummer has to be comfortable in many
styles and technically be able to play them

to a certain artistic level. For the Gershwin and Bernstein parts the
styles you have to be able to play are limited. It consists mainly of
jazz related patterns and a Mambo (Latin feel) in Bernstein.[^46]

#### Extra

An important skill is the ability to play with brushes. There are many
passages in the Gershwin and Bernstein pieces which require brush
playing. And the drummer has to be able to perform a good sounding
classical snare drum roll.

## The triad in cooperation 


#### The battle, or not

Especially the conductor and the drummer have to be co-creational and
open minded. The drums are acoustically the most powerful and it has no
use for a conductor to beat against the beat of the drums. Like Mark
Wigglesworth said in his book: "If people think a conductor is in a
position of power, that is nothing compared to the opportunities
afforded a percussion section. They have louder sticks".[^47] Normally
an orchestra is dependent of conductors but now they are also dependant
on a drummer who knows what he is doing. Because of this interdependence
they have to come to an agreement to make it work.

#### Communication

Communication is a key element. Getting to know each other even before
the rehearsal will open up the lines of communication. This makes it
easier to address musical issues during the rehearsal. In all my
observations during rehearsals I saw the conductor and drummer also
address musical issues after the rehearsal had finished and/or during
the breaks. Not everything was addressed immediately and in front of the
whole ensemble.

There has to be a mutual trust in each other to make it work. The
drummer has to trust that the conductor listens to him and is able to
follow and adjust the orchestra towards him. And the conductor has to
trust that the drummer can follow him during the other sections which
require more flexibility in timing. There can be a lot of push and pull
going on if they don't agree from the beginning of the section where the
drum starts to play. This can result in tempo variations during the bars
the drums are playing. You can hear this in a recording from the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra, Conducted by Carl Davis[^48]

The drummer also needs to be co-creational with the orchestra. A
classical orchestra is not used to play swing music. [Jim
Gwin](#appendix-l.-interview-during-lessons-jim-gwin) said: "An
orchestra is never gone swing like a band. With a 'good' band it's easy.
The time is so good that you don't have to worry about holding it
together. You can concentrate on feel. Orchestral timing is all over the
place. It never settles." But fortunately, according to [Marcel
Serierse](#appendix-i.-interview-marcel-serierse), orchestras are more
and more used to play groove related music and lock better and better
than before.

Playing with a volume that matches and blends in the orchestra will help
to get the orchestra to listen to the drummer. If it is too loud, the
people close to the setup will use earplugs and screens and that do not
help them to focus on their surroundings. From my experience, it feels
that the musicians will then get even more information from their eyes
and by watching the conductor and less from their ears. This will not
help to lock in to the drum groove.

#### Acoustics

Where the drummer is placed in the orchestra can make a big difference.
In my orchestra we place or replace the drum set to match the acoustic
circumstances. In the following examples there are photos of different
orchestras and halls and placement of setups.

With my orchestra we played a program which included the West Side Story
Overture, Porgy and Bess suite and some arrangements of Gershwin pieces
in the Zuiderstrand Theatre in the Hague. The arrangements contained
real drum parts and accompanied a singer and a harmonica player. We
ended up using two drum sets. One behind the orchestra for the best
connection with the rest of the percussion group so we could play the
West Side Story Overture well. And on drum set in the orchestra next to
the acoustic bass player and guitar player. And a bit closer to the
conductor and soloists.

![RO ZST audience view 2
setups.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image3.jpeg){width="5.220485564304462in"
height="2.537736220472441in"}

![RO ZST audience view 2
setups.jpg]{image3}

Conductor's view percussion and drum set for the Gershwin and Bernstein
pieces.

![RO ZST setup G and B conductor
view.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image4.jpeg){width="5.395149825021872in"
height="2.622642169728784in"}

![RO ZST setup G and B conductor]{image4}

Drummers view and drum set up for Bernstein and Gershwin pieces

![RO ZST setup G and B orchestra
view.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image5.jpeg){width="5.530996281714786in"
height="2.688678915135608in"}

!{image5}

Conductor's view drum set, guitar and bass for the arrangements

![RO ZST setup jazz conductor
view.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image6.jpeg){width="5.608625328083989in"
height="2.726415135608049in"}

!{image6}

Drummers view and setup for arrangements

![RO ZST setup jazz drummer
view.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image7.jpeg){width="5.2527515310586175in"
height="2.5534208223972in"}

!{image7}

**Residentie Orchestra**. For a program in Paard the Hague we played
with a French chansonnier and we used this placement. Next to the piano
player who had a big role in the program and close to the bases. A
monitoring system was set up so we could all hear each other perfectly.

View from the hall Paard the Hague

![RO P.Elan Audience
view.jpeg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image8.jpeg){width="5.33765748031496in"
height="3.0024332895888013in"}

!{image8}

Conductor's view Residentie Orchestra in Paard the Hague.

![RO P.Elan conductor
view.jpeg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image9.jpeg){width="5.148847331583552in"
height="2.896227034120735in"}

!{image9}

**Boston Pops Orchestra** Setup for the Summer of '69 program with
soloist Arlo Guthrie

The Band, drums, guitar, bass, piano, is at the back of the orchestra.
Everybody has monitoring.

Audience view

![BPO Arlo Guthrie audience view
rehearsal.jpg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image10.jpeg){width="5.2527515310586175in"
height="2.5534208223972in"}

!{image10}

**National Symphony Orchestra Pops**. Concert of Diana Ross in Kennedy
Center Washington. (Thanks to Tony Overwater for the photo).

The band is placed in front of the orchestra. Remarkable to see that the
music stand of the drummer faces away from the conductor. This would
make it much harder for the conductor to get in touch with the drummer
and make small adjustments during the performance.

![Dianna Ross Kennedy Center
Washington.jpeg](files5e9ee3e9127bd4.83079508/media/image11.jpeg){width="5.408805774278215in"
height="3.5566043307086614in"}

# 6. Interpretation and preparation of parts

## Parts are unreliable

Most of the drum parts are only giving a basic outline on what to play.
There is no clearly defined system for composers, arrangers and copyists
how to write for drums. You are most of the time confronted with some
kind of basic sketch which include time signature, tempo markings, and
style of the arrangements (rock, swing, latin). It is up to the drummer
to determine what to play and what is appropriate for the music. This
means that the drummer has to be musically and technically prepared to
perform the parts. He must know all the ins and outs of the specific
styles to be able to sound authentic.

-   Western musical notation is woefully unequipped to illustrate any
    feel or pulse aside from straight or triplet-shuffle rhythm. Even
    the latter requires an artificial accommodation and is impractical
    to notate throughout a piece. A "between the cracks" rhythm, on the
    other hand, cannot be adequately notated whatsoever. Instead, it can
    only be learned through listening and actual practice*.*[^49]

Even when parts are partly rhythmically notated there is missing
information on all kinds of small groove related stuff like ghost notes
or the amount of hi-hat opening. An additional important skill is to be
able to adjust beats or grooves when a conductor or soloist asks to play
something different or in a different way.

Here is a very clear example of how unreliable parts can be. These are
two examples of the same bars of 'On the Town' Three Dance Episodes by
Bernstein, just from different Publishers.

Example 1: Starts immediately with the written shuffle pattern.

!{image12}

Example 2. Same spot as above but from a different Publisher.

!{image13}

After 23 bars the part in the second example also turns into the written
shuffle pattern.

As you can see in these examples there are also extra remarks written
down by the players themselves. This is a common sight when we get parts
which have been used by another percussionist. Sometimes the conductor
has specific wishes but most of the time it is up to the drummer to
choose a musical fitting pattern and a functional sound. A sound that
fits the acoustic and is audible for the whole orchestra. The parts do
not give enough information on where to change from brushes to sticks or
from hi-hat to cymbal. Sometimes added remarks even contradict or have
been crossed out by the next player. This can be because of personal
musical choice or audibility in the hall.

In some places there is room to make a fill or setup the next entrance
so the orchestra can come in at the right spot. The 'golden rule' that I
have heard from different players is always the same. Sometimes referred
to as the K.I.S.S. system: 'Keep It Simple Stupid'.

Don't get in the way of the orchestra and help everybody to play well.
It has no use to show you technical ability at this point and play to
many notes or experiment with beat displacement. This will only confuse
the rest of the orchestra and quite possibly the next entrance will be
messy. A common 'possible messy orchestral entrance point' worth
mentioning are the two solo Jazz Break spots in the West Side story -
Symphonic Dances from Bernstein, between bar numbers 666 and 676.

Several players are also not purists when it comes to the parts. You
hear many interpretations of the parts in several recordings. A
selection of recordings and their interpretation can be found in
[Appendix
B](#appendix-b.-analysis-and-comparison-of-the-drum-parts-as-performed-and-interpreted-by-the-drummer-on-recordings-from-bernstein.).
[Gerald
Scholl](#appendix-f.-summary-of-the-master-class-by-jerry-gerald-scholl-on-drums-in-orchestra.)
adds bass drum notes under cymbal crashes or adds extra cymbal crashes
to give length to patterns or give it more big band feel are common
practice. Everything possible that is deemed necessary to color the
orchestra.

## Preparation: General

To be able to play with confidence and authority so you can lead an
orchestra it is vital that you have prepared your parts as well as
possible. One drummer said you have to know the parts better than the
conductor. You have to have done your research and listened to
recordings. For *Gershwin and Bernstein* you can listen to original cast
recordings of the Broadway shows for reference.

When playing with soloists or singers you have to have listened to their
recordings of the pieces. So you know what they are used to expected of
the drum parts (Groove, ghost notes, fills). Some soloists are very
particular and want to hear the same fills they are used to.

The drummers I interviewed made lists on Spotify of the songs so they
can listen to the songs several times. Try to identify the basics of the
song and put in numbers, phrases, style and start of the lyrics. Use a
metronome during rehearsals and concerts when it is necessary to get the
exact right tempo.

It is not uncommon to get parts with limited information like this
example below. You get lost very easy during rehearsal if you don't know
the song form in relation to this part.

Example of a clean drum part the drummer gets before rehearsals

!{image14}

Example with remarks of the same song after the rehearsal and concert.

!{image15}

## Summary of the necessary technical and musical demands

The technical and musical demands for the Gershwin/Bernstein parts are
quite specific.

For specific patterns and styles: [Appendix A. Analysis drum
parts](#appendix-a.-analysis-of-parts-gershwin-and-bernstein)

### Gershwin

Swing Brush and Ride patterns at different tempos

Use of small auxiliary percussion. Splash cymbal, woodblock

New Orleans style, Second line style marching patterns.

¾ bar swing

Snare drum rolls, syncopated accents with added bass drum

Tom-tom licks.

### Bernstein

Irregular Time signatures

Syncopated snare and bass drum parts.

Snare drum rolls and Flam's

Shuffle patterns. With brushes and sticks.

Tom-tom fills

Basic timekeeping in different tempos

Rumba 3/2/2 pattern

Marching snare and bass drum pattern

Semi shuffle

Four pitched tom-tom solo part

Mambo cowbell  pattern with offbeat bass drum and hi-hat

Linear time patterns over the setup

'African style' 6/8 pattern on snare, toms and tenor drum

## Variation in interpretation

When you listen to different recordings made by different orchestras you
can tell that there is a great variety in the way the drummers interpret
and execute the same part. See [Appendix
B](#appendix-b.-analysis-and-comparison-of-the-drum-parts-as-performed-and-interpreted-by-the-drummer-on-recordings-from-bernstein.).
Parts are very limited and basic in their information and drummers seem
to use these parts as a guideline and are not purists and feel obligated
to only follow the written part. Brush pattern are played by some
players exactly as written. Others add some whoosh and also follow the
music by accenting en embellish the ongoing beat. In some occasions the
classical notation seems to get in the way of the flow of the music and
interpretation inside the orchestra sounds not the same.[^50]

### Tempo drops

In some recordings the tempo is not steady and the metronome markings
can drop and go up in a few bars time.

The major triad is not working perfectly here. This result is a tempo
drop from 100 till 92. After that the tempo is established again to 99.
So the initial tempo seemed to be perfectly on top. [^51]

### On top or not

Some of the drum parts in the recordings sound as the drummer is in the
lead. He is in front of the beat and timing of the orchestra. On other
the drum part sounds late and a little behind.

[]{#_Toc38200917 .anchor}**Jim Gwin's interpretation** and tips when
performing On the Town and West Side Story

When talking about creating your own part based on the score or on the
general feel of the piece Jim said: "If possible create your own thing.
But you have to be able to do both ways". 

### 'On the Town', Three Dance Episodes

I: The Great Lover:

B: Brush played with accents, they (the orchestra) have to hear. addREC
27.50

Play upbeat, but small, don't confuse the orchestra.

N 5th bar: In the end I play quite even. Not with triplet feel. REC
33.10

Listen to Apple Honey by Woody Herman and Thundering Herds . Davey
Tough, favorite of Buddy Rich, Gene Krupa is the drummer.

I'm thinking about him or something like that. For getting the feel in
your head.

 

III Times Square: 1944

Beginning: When you first start anything give a big downbeat, so
everybody knows where to start.

B: plays swing instead of written. REC1.08.30

Plays all accents with bass drum. REC 01.11.00

F: shuffle pattern. Bass drum. triplet feel: 1, (2) and 3, (4) and.
Snare 2 and, 4 and.

Widen the eight notes, helps to settle everything. No exact 6/8. It's
like Latin music. Not straight.

it's like a New Orleans thing to me. Make the 2 and 4 louder.

Q:Plays all the orchestral hits, instead of bass drum quarter notes. REC
01.14.00

### Symphonic Dances from West Side Story:

Bar 154: Fast swing ride cymbal time. Play through, do not follow the
part. I played it this way with Andris Nelsons (chief- conductor BSO),
he liked it and said: "this was the easiest time ever". For me it makes
more sense and it sounds good.

#### Mambo:

Mambo offbeat in the bass drum does not make sense. Nobody does that in
Latin, it does not fit the groove. Most important thing, the clave, is
missing. I play that. Unless anybody(conductor) specifically asks.
Nobody did that so far.

Bar 400: I play the first four cowbells bars as written and all the
snares also. REC STE002 00.25.00. Play a cascara pattern if possible.
Underneath a 2-3 Clave. This changes depending on the melody when the
brass enters to a 3-2 clave later. Common in Latin music. Play bass
drum. and hi-hat on 1 and 3 for steadiness. Latin feel is a special kind
of groove. 

Bar 466: I play a Latin pattern instead of the 4 pitched drums

Bar 496: play cowbell and bass drum as written.

504: play upbeat like Buddy Rich and than 4 bars of Big Band fill
playing.

524: play a simple pattern, there is o much going on, but do the bass
drum on the 2 and 4.

#### Fugue:

Bar 607: Like written, brush on cymbal, doesn't make sense. I like the
way Shelly Manne does it on the original soundtrack. Start with bushes
on snare. I play all the big hits, with bass drum and with
embellishments, also the bongo and tenor drum hits. And ad the hi-hat
later, go to sticks on hi-hat. Build it, open your hi-hat more and more.
Than go to the cymbal. Play simple fills.

Bar 656: Big band playing with cymbals and embellishments in the
accented orchestral hits

Bar 666: Play simple fills with an accent on the one. (bar 669) That
will help the orchestra to get in on the right time on the next bar.

(Fills in the original movie soundtrack contain two bars soloing instead
of 1).

Bar 680: I play time and don't do the tom-tom licks. That doesn't sound
like a thing a drummer would do.

Set up the cymbal accents on the 4 and.

Bar 695 and 696: I play very loud.

Shelly Manne in movie soundtrack plays decrescendo triplets. When I do
it the conductor always asks for a crescendo.

# 7. Discussion


## Like no other


*It is a hard and difficult job being the drum set player in a symphonic
orchestral setting. Even the most called for players have to be on the
top of their game to be able to pull this off at a high artistic level.
Of course the most striking difference when it comes to playing drums in
a band versus an orchestra is the conductor and the amount of players
involved.*

*Conductors expect them to be a second and sometimes even first
conductor. They have to take over the conductor's role. This is only
achieved or granted when the conductor trusts that the drummer is able
to do so. There is no other instrumentalist in an orchestra which is
granted so much power and control. Working with a big symphonic
orchestra and a conductor as an intermediary with interpretive gestures
means that your primary role, timekeeping, can create more push and pull
than in other musical settings. Next to this he must be able to play
all, literally all, kinds of musical styles and adapt on request. This
requires not only a wide technical and musical ability but also a
confident and self-aware yet flexible personality. Because of the
interdependence of conductors, the drummer must be a good communicator
so problems can be addressed. Normally this is not a common thing to do
in an orchestral setting.*

*Most conductors are not deep enough into specific drum matters so that
means that the drummer is the expert when it comes to interpreting the
parts. The drum parts only provide a basic guideline and leave a lot
open for interpretation. To be able to perform them with conviction the
drummer needs to prepare the parts in detail. Due to cost reduction in
many orchestras there is a short rehearsal process and there is not much
time for experimentation. They have to know the right tempo, feel and
structure of the song and lay a foundation the orchestra can build on.
They must balance on the thin line of providing the right groove and
feel but not overplay as it can cause the orchestra to lose track and
get lost. The orchestra needs drummers who can do this. And having a
trade mark or an 'own sauce' as Hans Leenders calls it, is important for
a jazz or pop drummer, but not in orchestral situations.*

## How do the experts cope?


*During the interviews it was clear that they are very aware of the
things written above. They are all master drummers and during their
career they gained experience in working with orchestras and conductors.
Through a classical percussion education or having a mentor who gave
insight in this process. During their whole career they played in a lot
of different musical settings and styles. They studied and researched
the great drummers before them and know how to sound authentic in every
style. This made them versatile drummers and also flexible enough to
understand how classical musicians interpret the gestures of a
conductor. They also know how hard it is to play with an orchestra. Jim
Gwin called it: "an orchestra is the hardest thing, it's like a
different kind of animal. Orchestral timing is all over the place, it
never settles". They all have developed ways to cope with this and in
Jim's words: "give the illusion that it sounds good." *

## Differences

*These are the most striking differences when it comes to band drummers
and symphonic drummers. Others skills I found and are in [Appendix
C](#appendix-c-musical-skills), [D](#appendix-d-personal-skills) and
[E](#appendix-e-technical-skills), are for a big part general
musicianship skills and apply to all musicians. And the specific drummer
skills apply to both band and orchestral settings.*

*When playing drum set in an orchestral setting there is a division to
be made when it comes to groove related music and symphonic related
music. With symphonic pieces like Bernstein and Gershwin timing can be
stretched and call for a more classical approach. There are more places
where one rhythm deviates from another and the transitions has to go
through the conductor to get the orchestra in line. The amount of styles
is also limited with these composers. As to be seen in chapter 6, all
the patterns are jazz related and one Latin part in the Mambo of the
West Side Story by Bernstein. In my research I found that there are many
different choices made by the drummers when playing these parts. The
instructions by the composer are not always followed and instruments are
added or patterns are changed*

*I even found differently printed drum patterns of the same spot in the
music. The parts were from two different publishers.*

## My assumptions and changes


*The honesty and openness I experienced during the interviews helped me
to discuss and address all the struggles I experienced when playing drum
set in the orchestra. It turned out that they shared most of them and
developed ways of coping with them. The biggest difference between us
was their mastery of the drum set. *

*In a technical way because of the many more hours they spend behind a
drum set and being able to perform many styles at a high level. Marcel
Serierse said: 'technically you have to be able to play on auto pilot.
If you can do that you can focus on what is going on around you. Your
ears will open up and you hear so much more. You can blend better. That
is an essential skill for drummers". I certainly don't have that many
hours in my system and that is probably the same for other classical
percussion players. I watched a video of a master class Mel Lewis gave
in 1985 where he talked about steering with your feet instead of your
hands. Mel Lewis said: "The bass drum controls the band, the hands are
dressing. Down here (the bass drum) is necessary, Up here (the hands) is
where you create'.*[^52] *Jim Gwin called the feet, (bass drum and
hi-hat) the anchor of the orchestra. I realized that this was the
opposite of what I was trying to do when trying to steer the orchestra
in my direction. My strongest limbs are my hands and I can control the
orchestra with this during a lot of classical pieces. My weakness is the
control in my feet. This changed my way of studying, the way I approach
the parts and my actual playing in the orchestra.*

*Musically because of their education, knowledge and in-depth study of
the '[greats](#reading-guide)' and all the experiences playing in
different bands and settings. They absolutely know how to interpret the
parts to make it sound and feel good. When they have to match a
recording but there are many overdubs on the record, they know how to
alter the parts but still maintain the essentials. *


*I often had trouble interpreting the way the Bernstein and Gershwin
notated the drum rhythms. And indications of instruments and sticks did
not work in the orchestra. Working with Jim Gwin on the parts and
watching the master class by Jerry Scholl showed me an open way of
interpreting these parts. They only cared about the character of the
music. Cymbal crashes were added to give color or length to notes, extra
bass drum notes for extra punch. Indications for the use of brushes or
sticks where ignored if necessary.*

*Jim Gwin changes the cowbell patterns and adds a cascara rhythm with a
3-2 clave in the snare in the Mambo from West Side Story to give it a
better Latin feel. Also playing along even when the parts indicate bars
rest in the fast swing part was welcomed by conductor Andris Nelson. He
liked it and said: 'this was the easiest time ever."*

*They also play non written upbeats to help the orchestra with their
entrance. The recordings I analyzed show that this is a common thing to
do but every drummer does what he thinks works. There seems to be no
general agreement on interpretation. The important remark the
interviewed drummers made was to keep the upbeats, fills, embellishments
and grooves simple enough so the orchestra is able to follow.*

*Before this research I was under the assumption that the main role of
the drummer, the timekeeping part, was absolute essential and always to
be maintained. This led to my battle feeling with conductors and the
orchestra. The interviewed drummers do also feel this push and pull and
even though it is not their ideal picture had less of a problem with
this. They know band time is not possible in an orchestra and don't
strive for this against the odds. Arie den Boer plays much more decisive
when playing in a band. And said : "With such a big group (orchestra)
you have to be very flexible." Marcel Seriese gives the orchestra room
to breathe when they have fast lines to play. Not that the tempo
collapses but a tiny bit slow so the orchestra is able to play it all.
They are flexible enough to work around it and still make it feel good.
This realization helped me to be less strict in the time keeping part.*

## Research into practice


*Luckily I got the chance to put all this into practice in January of
this 2020. My orchestra played a concert with a mixed program containing
Porgy and Bess by Gershwin and West Side Story Overture by Bernstein.
And accompanying two soloists with a rhythm section with jazzy
arrangements of Porgy and Bess. I decided to use two drum sets because
of the diversity of the program. In the [acoustics](#acoustics) section
you can find the pictures of the placement of the two setup. The
Bernstein and Gershwin set at the back of the orchestra. The normal
percussion spot. This helped me connect to my other percussionists. We
had to play a lot together in these pieces. And the other set, for the
accompanying part, next to the bass player of the orchestra. The soloist
and rhythm section were too far apart to hear each other without
monitoring.*

*During this research period I spent more study time on drums than
before and took all the advice into account when preparing this program.
The major change was to think from the bottom up. I spent more conscious
time on developing my legs using the bass drum and hi-hat as an anchor
for the rhythms. Through the research of the history of jazz drumming
and listening to early recordings I got a better sense of how to
interpret parts. And could make confident choices that served the music
in a way I found musically and historically appropriate. This worked
really well for the symphonic pieces. I had a better grip on the
orchestra, less feeling of a battle and this was the first time I could
really enjoy playing drum set in an orchestral setting.*

*It did not work so well for the accompanying part. This felt really
uncomfortable. The music had real open rhythm section parts. My drum
capacities did not feel good enough to perform at the appropriate
artistic level. The walking bass player was just like me a classical
musician and did not have much experience in this kind of music. We did
not lock together as a good rhythm section should be. Next time I would
have a 'real' drummer play this section of the program.*

*Even though both drum parts were jazz related these are two different
kind of programs. A symphonic based and a rhythm section based program
which need two different kinds of drumming approach. One which is
flexible enough to play with a conductor and one who can really swing,
lock in with the bass player and be the foundation for the rhythm
section.*

*And as we find in the Netherlands and the [story](#story) of Jim Gwin
shows: there are not many drummers who can do both at a high artistic
level.*

## Limitations


*The hard part of my research was the artistic aspect. In the beginning
I was searching for recordings of drummers that sounded good. But what
is good? And who decides? During the analyzing of recordings there were
choices made by the drummers that would not match my artistic standard
and rhythms and fills sound out of place. I don't know the background of
how these choices were made or other factors that influenced the
recordings. *

*Where the drummers on the recordings actual 'real' drummers or
classically trained percussionists? What was the setup in the hall or
studio? How was the cooperation between the conductor and the drummer?
Was there a limited time frame so there was no time for another take?
Did the sound engineer or artistic team also notice this? Or was it not
a problem for them?*

*The analyses of the recordings therefore do not contain much of my
opinion but focuses mainly on the audible interpretations of the drum
part and the changes made by the drummers.*

## Further research


*During this research I discovered the importance of controlling and
steering an orchestra with your feet instead of your hands. To what
extend are, hands orientated, classical educated percussionists aware of
this aspect and use it when performing these parts? Does it really help
to have better control of the orchestra? Do the other orchestra members
consciously or unconsciously notice the difference and do they really
react on it? *

*This is something that I would like to investigate further. *

## Recommendations

*Incorporate orchestral drum set lessons in the classical curricula of
conservatories. A lot of conservatories give classical students the
opportunity to follow drum lessons. These are mainly given by 'real'
drummers' who cannot address this specific orchestral side because they
lack the experience. By giving background information about the drum
history and the connection with Gershwin and Bernstein, sharing the
experiences from the experts in the field, and working on the specific
details of the parts and their preparation, would prepare them better
for the task. Even though orchestras are doing more of these kind of
programs, the opportunities to work with a professional symphonic
orchestra are rare. Rehearsal time is limited so you don't get many
changes. By incorporating it in the curriculum the group of competent
players can grow.*

*Conservatories should include pieces which combine rhythm section and
orchestras in programs for their school orchestras. Crossover programs
become more and more present and this will reflect the common practice
in today's orchestras This will get students acquainted and gain
experience dealing with both sides of the musical spectrum. Creating
awareness and understanding.*

*Include working with rhythm sections, and drummers, in the education of
conductors. Knowing what a rhythm section needs from a conductor and
realizing how interdependent they are would help during rehearsals and
concerts. Conductors can adjust their gestures or choose to do a
count-in instead.*

*Creating awareness with artistic teams of orchestras about the
difficulties when performing groove related programs. This would most
probably be the role of the classical percussionists of the orchestra.
It could prevent artistic and financial problems early on in the
planning process. The choice of doing groove-related programs affects
agreements with arrangers, being in time to contact the good, and
limited available drummers, or even a complete rhythm section. Think
about venue and stage plans for the orchestra and placement of the
rhythm section. And the necessity to use sound engineers and good
monitoring. Contracting sound engineers and equipment would lead to
extra costs. Choosing to cut costs and play without monitoring could
lead to inferior artistic output.*

*\
*

# 8. Conclusion


*So what does it take to be able to play the drum set part in a
symphonic orchestra at a high artistic level?*

*The ideal drummer for a symphonic orchestra must be able to combine
skills out of two worlds. The flexible time skill of a classical
percussionists when playing the standard symphonic repertoire of
Bernstein and Gershwin and tight timekeeping skills when drumming in a
band setting. Be a master on his instrument and able to play fluently in
many different styles. A good communicator with a co-creational mind who
is confident and self aware enough to know when to take over the
conductors role and lead the orchestra. Having good listening skills for
being flexible, adaptable and able to follow the conductor when
necessary.*

*A classical background will help to get acquainted with and interpret
the gestures of a conductor and have affinity with the timing and feel
of an orchestra. Drum education prepares you for all the drum skills you
need, but it is hard to gain orchestral experience in a school setting.*

*This research and process changed the way I play and feel when playing
drums in the orchestra. Putting it all to practice during the January
concert of 2020 was a great experience and a lot of things fell into
place. When people would ask me now if I consider myself a drummer the
answer would be: "Yes, a symphonic drummer."*

*I want to conclude with something Marcel Serierse said in the interview
and for me reflects the mentality of the ideal drummer:*

*"You have to think it is not about me. It is about the music and I can
contribute my qualities. You have to go for the whole picture and not
because you are that insane drummer. The orchestra has to be happy
because they can time together with me. And if everybody is happy than I
am still the one who makes it all possible."*

# Acknowledgements

There are several people I would like to thank during this period of my
research:

The Royal Conservatory The Hague for making it possible to work with the
expert in the field. The research team and my fellow circle teams
members for all the helpful comments and remarks.

My supervisor Marlon Titre for guiding me through the process, defining
and redefining my research question and your analytic and critical
thinking.

My wife Birgitta for rearranging family schedules and helping with
layout and general Word related questions.

Jim Gwin for providing me the opportunity to have lessons on the drum
parts and ability to watch you rehears and perform with the Boston Pops
Orchestra. Your experience and tips created the backbone of this
research. Hans Leenders, Joost Geevers, Marcel Serierse and Arie den
Boer for sharing your expertise during the interviews. Your honesty and
openness was a great gift and not only helped me to put this research
into words, but also reflect on my own playing and development as a
drummer.

# Appendix A. Analysis of Parts Gershwin and Bernstein

For this research I analyzed the drum parts of the following pieces. I
choose these pieces because they are commonly programmed in symphonic
orchestral seasons all over the world. They appear In order of original
performance dates.

**Gershwin:**

Strike up the Band Overture 1934 (Musical 1927)

Girl Crazy overture (1930 musical)

Piano Rhapsody no. 2 (1931)

Cuban Overture 1932

Porgy and Bess Opera (1935)

**Bernstein:**

On the Town, three dance episodes (1945) musical 1944

Prelude, Fugue and Riffs 1949 premiere 1955 (Big band)

Trouble in Tahiti. - Bernstein 1951

Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story" (1960) (Musical 1957)

A summary of the technical and musical demands are given in Chapter 6
[Summary of the necessary technical and musical
demands](#summary-of-the-necessary-technical-and-musical-demands) .

**Gershwin**

**Strike up the Band Overture**  (Musical 1927)

Drum part

A small part of ride pattern swing towards the end of the piece.

**Girl Crazy overture (**for Symphonic Orchestra)

There are many different arrangements to be found of this piece. Songs
of frequent occurrence are: *'Embraceable you', 'I got rhythm' and 'But
not for me'*

Drums part

Brushes swing pattern slow to fast tempo's MM 140- 250

Tom-tom patterns

Basic timekeeping boom-click: On bass drum, hi-hat and snare

Rolls and syncopated accents

Extra in the Musical version: ¾ bar swing in Act 1: No.1 Overture

**Piano Rhapsody no. 2**

No real drum part:

Auxiliary percussion: syncopated choked splash and woodblock

'boom-click' pattern on bass drum, hi-hat-snare

**Cuban Overture** (1932)

No drum part but worth mentioning because of the prominent role for the
percussion section. Includes, Bongo's, Maracas, quiro, claves.

**Porgy and Bess Opera** (1935)

*A Woman is a sometime thing*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldPuFA0PG8k>

!{image16}

Drum part:

Brush pattern swing

Ride pattern swing

Marking in part: different traps as. lib.\* (\* m451: Part for first
production notes "no bass drum")

*Oh I can't sit down*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtqDjCPqrIw>

!{image17}

Drum part:

Marching band type snare and bass drum pattern

*It ain't necessarily so*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kP5O_NUhrK0>

!{image18}

*What you want with Bess, drums start at 2:25*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-IhpO4NiMg>

!{image19} 

Drum part:

Slow bass drum snare drum pattern triplet feel

*There\'s a boat dat\'s leaving soon for New York*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lh5ijrsHx5Q>

{!image20}

Drum part:

brush swing pattern

Woodblock

*A Red Headed woman, drums start at 0:49*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Am6L7X3GlYo>

Example 1

!{image21}

Example 2

!{image22}

Drum part:

Brush swing pattern

Marching band type snare and bass drum pattern

*Oh Lord, I'm on my way*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ptttSZfT6M>

!{image23}

Drum part: 

Syncopated snare and bass drum part

**Bernstein**

On the town Three Dance episodes (1945)

Containing three songs

*1 The Great Lover Displays Himself*

*2 Lonely Town (no drums)*

*3 Times Square: 1944*

Drum part:

Irregular time signatures

!{image24}

Syncopated snare drum/bass drum patterns.

Example 1

!{image25}

Example 2

!{image26}

shuffle pattern, starts with brushes, go to cymbals and builds in
character.

Brush patterns, accents on 3and. accents on 4and.

Possibility for small fills and lead in the brush sections. Not notated!

**Prelude, Fugue and Riffs** (1949)

Real Jazz ensemble with 'Big Band' drum parts. Big Band drummer
necessary.

**Trouble in Tahiti** 1951

*Prelude. Daa Doa Day*

Drum part:

Brush swing pattern. Alternating .4/4 en ¾ bars

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-drPgEtRTFU>

*I. How could you say the thing that you did*

Drum part:

Tomtom fills at the end 4:50

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6gdMWjTOFjg>

*II. Yes? Oh mister Partridge*

Drum part:

small swing section 1:05

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GpiFs8YYTs>

III No drums

*VI. What a movie scene: *

Drum part:

Basic time keeping

Rumba 3/3/2 pattern

Tomtom fills

Marching pattern

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btAAj90c4DM>

*V. There is a law*

Drum part:

Semi shuffle part 3:38

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X8ZvuiQxVXU>

*VI No drums*

*VII. Evenin' shadows are spreadin' softly*

Drum part:

Slow time keeping cymbal and brush

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVGWSdnxpwA>

**Symphonic Dances from West side Story**

Drum part:

Several times 4 Pitched drum solos and patterns

Example:

!{image27}

Syncopated Rhythms

Irregular Time Signatures

In the *Mambo*:

Cowbell pattern with offbeat bass drum.

Linear Time patterns over the set.

Example 1, Linear Time pattern

!{image28}

Example 2, Linear Time pattern

!{image29}

In the *Fugue*: 

Notated in the part as: Brush on cymbal.

Most commonly played on the hi-hat or with stick/hot rod on cymbal.
(open close)

!{image30}

Building from to real big band style playing with solo jazz breaks.

!{image31}

*In Rumble:*

'African Style' pattern on snare drum, tenor drum and tomtoms. 6/8 bar
with accented second eighth note.

Appendix B. Analysis and Comparison of the drum parts as performed and interpreted by the drummer on recordings from Bernstein.
===============================================================================================================================

For this section I listened to different recordings of the same piece by
different orchestras and conductors. And therefore also different
drummers. I focused on the way the drummer interprets the parts to find
out if there was some general consensus of how they play these parts.
And the general feel of connection between the orchestra and drummer.

**On the Town.** Bernstein original recording, Leonard Bernstein
conductor

RCA Victor Symphony Orchestra (Listed as \"On the Town Orchestra\" on
label)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A2glmS40fJ4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A2glmS40fJ4)

Overall:

Lots of noise on recording. Vibrant, short and sharp playing in the
ensemble

Drums sounds far away and a little late.

Drummer does not lead.

Drummer plays almost only as written. Only adding a few Cymbal crashes
and snare rolls.

*I The Great Lover Displays Himself*

From the beginning of the recording

Tempo half note = 132

B brush on snare like written. No woosh

F Doesn't play the flams and rolls.

I Not on cymbal but on snare

L added a cymbal crash on 2nd bar

*III Times Square: 1944*

From 4:52 on recording

Tempo half note = 88 starts with this and with crescendo gets faster to
96

Beginning: Basic playing

B: bass drum beats not as written

E: extra cymbal crash

F: six bars of rest before drummer starts. Together with sax entrance.

I: drummers plays snare drum rolls (not in part) following the musical
line

After 5th bar in K there is a cut to letter T

**On The Town**, Three Dance Episodes. Minnesota Orchestra Conductor:
Edo de Waart

American Music. Provided to YouTube by Parlophone UK

℗ 1991 Erato Disques, a Warner Music UK Division

Composer: Leonard Bernstein

Overall:

Drummer sounds late. Is a little behind the orchestra and does not lead
the orchestra.

*I The great Lover Displays Himself*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjxqZKWOxKg>

(0:15)

Tempo half note = 116

Concert bass drum is used, no audible drum set bass drum

B: Brush on snare, accented 3 and.

J: small fill just before J

M: missing cymbal first beat

*III Times Square: 1944*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drhKq0Eawzk>

Tempo half  note = 92

Beginning drummer plays with small embellishments

bar 8 drummer plays exactly what is  classically written. Not together
with rest of orchestra timing.

D: bar 7 no triplet in cymbal upbeat

F: brush first bar no shuffle. Start from second bar. Bass drum every
first note of the  bar

Makes variations in bass drum, also triplets.

R: cymbal time with sticks.

S: turns to brushes on snare with swipe

T: misses last two bars

**On the Town**: From the album \"New York! New York! Symphonic Dances
and Overtures from Musicals\". Performed by the Royal Philharmonic
Orchestra. Conducted by Carl Davis. 

\(c) Royal Philharmonic Masterworks. Retrieved January 7, 2020.

Overall:

Drummer leads the orchestra. He plays in front of the time.

*I The Great Lover Displays Himself*

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kTpa3MKBCgE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kTpa3MKBCgE)

Tempo half note = 122

B: Brush swipe playing

G: cymbal crashes not audible

I: plays offbeat on hi-hat slightly open

Plays rimshots in the last few bars (not written)

*III Times Square: 1944*

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G7UlCYj0El0>

Tempo half note = 108

Drummer adds phrasing and embellishments

F: Marks entrance with ruff (not written)

Tempo starts at 100 but drops after 15 bars to 94  then goes back to 99

R: plays cymbal on 1 and 3 (notated differently on 2 and + 4 and)

S:leaves cymbal out (as written) plays shuffle pattern (not written)

T: adds bass drum on cymbal notes bars 4 and 5 (not written)

two before U and two after not audible

Ending: short snare roll before snare hit (not written)

The division of the percussion parts in The Symphonic Dances can vary
depending on the preferences of the percussion players. The tom-tom or
the cowbell part can be played by a separate percussionist and is
sometimes played by the drummer. In the recording you cannot hear the
chosen division.

\*Numbers are bar numbers

**Symphonic Dances from West side story**

New York Philharmonic, Leonard Bernstein. Original released 1961, 1964
Sony BMG Music Entertainment. Spotify retrieved November 6 2019.

Overall: Real jazz/big band playing, energy and in demand.

8: chocked cymbal

15: 4 fast ride cymbal swing pattern, hi-hat 2 and 4

230: cymbal choked

237: extra embellishment (drag) in snare drum pattern

*MAMBO*

Cowbell pattern not as written , and not consistent in pattern
throughout.

Offbeat bass drum not audible on this recording

496: cowbell pattern not played as written

504: snare drum pattern is not played as written but follows the brass
line

*FUGUE *

607: immediate tempo increase from 155 to 165. Brushes swipe pattern on
snare (with variation)

Bar before 656 drummer goes to ride cymbal. Big band playing style but
basic.

Solo jazz break, real jazz break playing. Difficult to follow for
orchestra. Second entrance of orchestra in bar 674 is not together.

685: no triplet upbeats played

688-690: cymbal instead of written hi-hat.

705-730: is skipped in this version

**Symphonic Dances from West side story.** City of Birmingham Symphony
orchestra, Paavo Järvi. 1998. 2006 EMI Records Ltd/Virgin Classics.
Spotify retrieved November 6, 2019

Overall: Drums sounds in the beginning a little late and feels not in
the lead.

154: straight playing, 2 and 4 little accented.

*MAMBO*

Cowbell pattern not as written, pattern is consistent throughout.

Bass drum off beat clearly audible.

496: same pattern as before, but not as written.

504: snare drum pattern is not played as written (with rolls) but
follows the brass line.

524: rhythm not clearly audible. Offbeat bass drum is firmly accented.

*FUGUE*

607: consistent brush swipe pattern.

656: starts playing ride cymbal swing pattern. Heavy accented snare and
bass drum on orchestral hits.

666: plays one bar upbeat to 666. Fills in the syncopated rhythm with
snare, cymbal and bass drum.

Solo jazz break, real jazz break and easy to follow.

681-683: adds hi-hat accents. Are together with the accents in the
brass.

685: plays swing time

713: plays swing time again with accenting.

**Symphonic Dances from West side story.** Simon Bolivar Youth Orchestra
of Venezuela -- Dudamel 2007.

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UjNi1dkvTcw>

Retrieved November 6, 2019

8: Played on hi-hat instead of choked cymbal

154: Ride cymbal pattern and adds hi-hat on and 4

*MAMBO*

Completely improvised in the percussion but with Latin feel using drum
set, conga's, timbales/cowbell and bongo's.

Cowbell with timbales, kind of cascara pattern

No offbeat bass drum but 2 and 2and played.

Hi-hat plays a kind of guiro groove.

496-540: Groove continued throughout, not as written. Accents are
played.

*FUGUE*

607: played on hi-hat with stick. Opens on 2 and 4. And rim click on 2
and 4.

656: small upbeat. To ride cymbal swing pattern. Little preparation of
accents in bar 660

Solo jazz break. Easy to follow, good entrance of orchestra afterwards.

676: Swing pattern on hi-hat for some bars instead of tom-tom lick.

685-701: Messy but follow accents and plays small embellishments and
preparation of fills. Follows the music.

701 No traps played.

705 Traps starts to play on hi-hat. Nothing is written

713: Swing pattern on cymbal and accents

717-730 Swing hi-hat pattern

**Original Movie soundtrack GMB. 1957.** West Side story Orchestra,
Johnny Green.

(Drums Shelly Manne and other jazz musicians.) 

Gustavo Maorales Battaglini:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7OHCrp13Ho>

This is not from the symphonic Dances but used the original soundtrack
for the movie (1961).

Bars and music don't completely match but enough to compare how drummer
Shelly Manne interprets the parts.

Bar 154 = 8.18 in this YouTube link: Swing pattern on ride cymbal.
Hi-hat on 2 and 4

167: Cowbell pattern is different.

179 and on, drummer plays swing pattern on ride cymbal instead of
tom-toms.

243: same as in figure 179

*MAMBO 18:37*

Different cowbell pattern played

No audible bass drum but conga's on offbeat.

466 Cowbell pattern continues

524 Continues patterns

*COOL/FUGUE (56:18) *

Drummer plays everything on the hi-hat, no use of ride cymbal.

Plays closed hi-hat, until (656)

Cool: gets faster at a certain point. The orchestra has to adjust to the
film.

656: Still on hi-hat but opening on 2 and 4. Big band style of playing.

666: complicated fills and one bar longer than in the Symphonic Dances
version. The drummer plays even longer.

676 plays hi-hat and no tom-toms

685 plays all the accents with brass and everything on hi-hat.

705 plays along. (no drums written in Symphonic Dances)

Appendix C Musical skills
=========================

Extracted out of Duque, Jose Roman, "The Drummer's role" Kindle edition
(2017)

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Musical Skills</strong> Drummer in Band</th>
<th>times mentioned</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Time</strong> (great/sense of)</td>
<td>8</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Groove (able to/sense of)</td>
<td>6</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Solid Rhythm</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Rhythmic Backbone</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>NO time keeping policeman</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Taste</strong> (sense of)</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Feel (make it feel good, feels the rhythm inside)</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Creative rhythmic vocabulary</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Sense of form and orchestration</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Good sense of dynamics</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Great ideas</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Creative and interesting texturally to the music</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Addressing specific musical needs</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Support the song</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Provide the right emotional peaks and curves</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Give meaning to the form</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Draw intentional landscape</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Providing a good ride for everybody in the ensemble</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Sense of musicality</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Sense of melody within the drum set</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Color any given song</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Less is more</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Tone</strong> (great sound)</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Appendix D Personal skills
==========================

Extracted out of Duque, Jose Roman, "The Drummer's role" Kindle edition
(2017)

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Personal Skills</strong> Drummer in Band</th>
<th>times mentioned</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Ability to Listen/Listening</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Professionalism</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Interaction/communication on and off stage</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Energy</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Inventive/creative</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Be aware of the primary role</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Controlled/surrender ego</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Balanced emotional state of mind</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Patience</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Self confidence</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Musician that happen to play drums</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lift other players</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Welcoming input</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Willing to go deep into the music</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Great memory</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Appendix E Technical skills
===========================

Extracted out of Duque, Jose Roman, "The Drummer's role" Kindle edition
(2017)

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Technical Skills</strong> Drummer in Band</th>
<th>times mentioned</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Good Reader</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Comfortable in odd time signatures</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Comfortable in many styles</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Good balance in all limbs</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Having flowing and consistent linear playing</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Knowledge of different styles</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Appendix F. Summary of the Master class by Jerry (Gerald) Scholl on Drums in Orchestra.
=======================================================================================

Jerry Scholl is the principal timpani, percussion and drum set player in
the Wichita Symphony Orchestra in Tulsa. And head of the percussion
department at Wichita State University. His former teachers are**:** Vic
Firth and Fred Buda (former drummer of the Boston Pops). I attended his
master class at the Conservatory of Amsterdam on October 20, 2018 where
he showed and talked about his approach to playing drum set in an
orchestral setting. This is a summary of this one hour lesson.

**Drums in orchestra**

-Know the part better than anyone else, including the conductor.

-Get into the music, no matter what

-Where do you set up. Communication. (with rhythm section in front)

-How to setup music

-Every setup is different

-K.I.S.S. Keep it simple stupid. Don't get in the way

-An orchestra is like an oil tanker, keep it simple, help everybody to
play well.

-Acknowledge time has changed. (no special historic informed playing)

-Play character of the music.

**Charts and Challenges**

-Charts are unreliable

-Research and preparation!!!

.recordings

.make part, numbers, phrases, lyrics.

-Identify Basics

.Style: Rock/Jazz/Latin/World

.Tempo

.Show/Broadway use original cast recordings for reference), Movies,
Orchestra

**On the town, three dance episodes -- Bernstein**

-brushwork

-Color the orchestra, more fun.

Play like a Big band (L. Bernstein said)

Tip: Listen to big bands for reference

Part *I The Great Lover Displays Himself*

Beginning: He puts bass drum under cymbal for extra punch. 

B: lead in the brush section and plays accents on 3and

Part *III Times Square 1944*

**B:** 2ex bass drum with cymbals (played dry) on the accents

**C** Kick op 3and en open hi-hat

**D** end 1 2and instead of 1 2 3

**F** start easy 4 quarter time playing then building intensity

**Q** +cymbals with bass drum

2 before **T** Basses are in 4, so bass drum plays 4 on the floor

**X** +put extra cymbals with the bass drum to give length tot the notes

Appendix G. My observations on rehearsals and concerts
======================================================

**1. Rehearsal Boston Pops Orchestra with Jim Gwin (drums) **

Symphony Hall Boston (MA). May 15,  2019 from 9am - 1pm

program: Summer of '69 with guest artist Arlo Guthrie

Communication Personal:

The rehearsal started with the rhythm section (drums, piano, guitar,
bass), conductor and guest artist.

It was interesting to see the 'off stage' communication between Jim and
the rest of the rhythm section. They knew each other but it was a long
time ago they met in this combination. There was a lot of humor going on
and genuine interest. 

Place on stage and acoustic:

The rhythm section (guitar, electric bass, piano, drums) was placed at
the back and the guest artist in front of the stage. There were monitors
for all the players. The drum set was placed behind transparent Perspex
screens for loudness of sound and to avoid spill. 

Sound amplification in the hall sounds fine. Even the brushes on snare
are audible. 

Preparation:

There is only one rehearsal for this program. They did play it several
years ago and hired the same players for the rhythm section. 

Parts:

The first piece was a medley and the details of routing of the song
still had to be worked out. Some parts of the rhythm section were not
present yet. The Librarian rushed to get them in time for the complete
orchestral rehearsal.

Tempo: 

Conductor used a metronome to get the right tempo for the piece.

Interpretation and preparation:

Rhythm section rehearsal:

Jim is playing his hi-hat (two and four) constantly to establish pulse.
Even when he does not have to play. Jim is playing and leading all the
transitions and is really the basis of the band. He is playing
dynamically, lively but to the point.

Complete orchestra rehearsal:

Jim plays a bit louder during this rehearsal. And stays steady even
though the conductor is rushing. After an introduction section of the
orchestra Jim pulls the time backwards when entering. Getting the song
to the 'right' tempo.

Conductor:

The conductor gives clear hand signals for Vamp and continuing. All
these pieces start with a solo intro of Arlo Gutrie or he counts in the
tempo. 

Communication Drummer Conductor:

Jim has a lot of eye contact with the conductor. After the rehearsal he
walks to the sound engineer to fix a monitor problem. (not during the
rehearsal)  The working atmosphere is relaxed and a little bit chaotic.
Not many pieces are played. Trust in professionalism? 

Connecting with Orchestra.

Connection with the strings players is difficult. Monitoring problem?
There is disciplined orchestral playing and the string players sound
very rhythmical.

**2. Concert Boston Pops Orchestra with Jim Gwin (drums)**

Symphony Hall Boston (MA) May 16, 2019. Started 8pm Program: Summer of
'69 with guest artist Arlo Guthrie. Conducted by Keith Lockhart.

General:

High level of artistic playing. I noticed a few of the things we talked
about during the lessons. Jim was solving some problems when the
orchestra started to shift. Getting the right tempos even when the
conductor is (looking from the audience) not clear. Jim is catching the
soloist and plays 'flexible in time'.

**3. Rehearsal Residentie Orchestra with Marcel Serierse (drums) **

Rehearsal Hall Residentie Orchestra, November 14, 2019 program:
Symphonic Junction Residentie Orchestra ft. Sven Figee.

Drummer- Conductor:

The conductor starts the rehearsal with the first piece that starts with
a only drums 'Jeff Porcaro style' shuffle for eight bars. The conductor
gives 'three, four' with gestures and Marcel starts to play not in the
tempo given, but in the tempo needed for the song.

After the piece ends we start from the beginning again. The conductor
says to Marcel: 'I will give you a cue to start and then just start to
play'.

**4. Rehearsal Residentie Orchestra with Arie den Boer (drums)**

Rehearsal Hall Residentie Orchestra, December 7, 2019

program: Zilveren Kruis Gala concert in Muziekgebouw aan het IJ.

Place on the stage and acoustic:

The drums and percussion is setup at the back of the rehearsal stage.
There is a singer who also plays piano in front of the stage, next to
the conductor. During the rehearsal it is difficult to hear each other
and really play together. The singer asks if the drummer can play more
(meaning louder). The result is that the drum set is moved almost to the
center of the orchestra and closer to the singer.

Communication:

With another piece the drummer feels that the bass section of the
orchestra is behind him and the tempo of the conductor is too slow for
the tempo indication given by the arranger.

The drummer addresses this problem after finishing the piece. The
conductor checks the tempo and we do the piece again. Now in a faster
tempo. The bass section is also more alert to the drum pulse and is more
exact on the beat.

In the break the drummer talks to the conductor and the production to
see if it is possible to get the drums closer to the singer and bass
section of the orchestra. They decide to do so for the next rehearsal in
the hall.

**Appendix H. Interview Hans Leenders**
=======================================

September 13, 2019, Translated by Martin Ansink from Dutch to English

Interviewer: Martin Ansink (MA)

Interviewee: Hans Leenders (HL) Conductor

Hans Leenders (the Netherlands, 1971) studied percussion and conduction
at the Rotterdam Conservatoire. He started his career as a percussionist
with the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra, where he became Valery
Gergiev's assistant in 1999. He worked with orchestras such as the Noord
Nederlands Orkest, the Brabants Orkest, the Residentie Orkest and the
Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra. Abroad, he conducted orchestras such as
the Orchestre National du Capitole de Toulouse and the Orchestra of the
Mariinski Theatre in Saint Petersburg.

On Conductor Drummer

**MA**: What does a conductor need from a drummer?

**HL**: That he sounds like a drummer. The band skills, that he knows
how to groove, nice in each style. So that it sounds like real drummers
do. Not with fancy stuff. It has to feel nice and really tight. This is
something of the first things I miss when a classical percussionist sits
behind the drum set.

The best experiences were with drummers (Arie den Boer, Arno van
Nieuwenhuizen) who could move to the classical side. How the orchestra
is timing, how do you start with a regular conducted upbeat instead of a
count-in. Counting-in is what they prefer, they are used to that. They
can have a discomforting feeling when faced with classical timing. 

Knowing what happens around you and anticipate. The game of: here is the
timing, this group is late, where to choose for, how do I get between
them and make the end result sound well. Without being on an island and
go on by yourself.

That is a typical classical percussion skill.

The more drum skills you have, there seems to be a contrast with
flexibility in timing. It seems less.

**MA**: Is that a matter of experience or focus?

**HL**: Definitely another focus which will improve by experience. I
think that drum skills are more important because I can work around the
rest and coach the drummer.

Sometimes I take him apart and explain what happens in the orchestra.
They can feel insecure because they don't 'understand'.

Drummers also think: I don't go along with that, this is where the
timing is. they have to come to me (drummer).

Classical timing is not always desirable. Playing late can is sometimes
thought of as a beautiful thing. 

I prefer to bring the orchestra towards the drummer and not the other
way around. As a conductor you have to take a position in this case. It
is dependant of repertoire but when it is drum/drum repertoire there is
no question mark. The drummer is in demand and if another musician can't
hear him than play on my gestures.

And I manage to get a lot of drummers towards the classical timing. I
adjust my gestures and make it come together. I prefer that above a not
good sounding classical drummer.

On acoustics

**HL**: Sometimes it is hard to hear each other because of acoustics.
The NNO (Noord Nederlands Orkest) choose to use in-ears when faced with
groove related music. I

I have to convince the orchestra to use the right mix. Preferably put
hi-hat and kick drum in the mix. Because of the in-ears it sounds more
tight, like the Metropole Orchestra. That is an orchestra who really
feel it. 

We are normally used to time 'from a distance'.

On orchestra

**HL**: Musicians (Wind players) may think they play on time. The moment
they make sound it is less direct than percussive sounds and can
therefore sound late. It is an internal difference in timing.

With *Gershwin and Bernstein* the timing can be stretched. When the
Mambo starts you have to keep the tempo. But with the tom fills more
like a classical orchestra. Don't wear an eye mask.

**HL**: Most conductors are not deep enough into the specific drum
matters to indicate the difference and al the finesses of a drummer. I
know that I immediately hear if it a drummer sounds like a drummer or
not.

The biggest part, maybe 95% of the organization, (Artistic leader,
programmer, Artistic committee) in a classical orchestra does not have
the right frame of reference to determine this. Sometimes not even
within the percussion section. There is no knowledge and hopefully they
ask for input. The drummer who is asked to play is sometimes the one who
says that a band is needed.

When there is a band (Bass, Piano Guitar) The always feel immediately if
a drummer is good.

There is also a financial aspect to this. What are the costs to ask for
extra band players. And who is our audience? Who of the audience will
hear the difference? For who do we want to play at this high artistic
level. The classical audience will probably not hear it, but the
pop/jazz audience will.

Therefore it can happen that there will be a clash between the drummer
and the organization. Drummers who have this experience can be too
dominant for an orchestra or conductor.

On drummer:

**HL**: Jazz and pop musicians need, next to having a good drummer, to
have a someone with an own 'sauce'. I don't care about that. It has to
be in the right groove. In jazz and pop the demands are higher.

The responsibility for the tempo is in the hands of the drummer after
the initial upbeat.

For *Gershwin and Bernstein* there is no need for such a 'sauce'. Even
when the timing is going on it has to have a bit of flexibility.

**HL**: The ability to read.

# Appendix I. Interview Marcel Serierse

November 14, 2019 after a rehearsal with the Residentie Orchestra with
Sven Figee. In the preparation for a concert in Paard.

Translated by Martin Ansink from Dutch to English

Interviewer: Martin Ansink (MA) Drummer

Interviewee: Marcel Serierse (MS)

Marcel Serierse (1962) graduated from the Rotterdam Conservatory and
continued his studies in New York with, among others, Steve Gadd and Mel
Lewis. As a versatile studio and live drummer, Marcel Serierse is much
in demand. He played with Chaka Kahn, Bob Brookmeyer, Toots Thielemans,
Michel Petrucciani, Al Jarreau and many others. He works with several
orchestras including the Residentie Orchestra, Metropole Orchestra and
the Jazz Orchestra of the Concertgebouw. He teaches at the
Conservatorium van Amsterdam

On drummer and orchestras:

**MS**: There are a lot of good drummers, but this is another kind of
thing. Especially with this kind of program, like now. You have to be
able to play jazz, kind of fusion, kind of metal. The styles have to be
prominent and most important, you have to able to play with an
orchestra. And there are not many drummers who can do that.

On preparation

**MA**: You play in different musical settings, what is the big
difference according to you?

**MS**: You constantly deal with differences, you basically know which
style it should be, so you are able to play these styles. You adjust
your set, your cymbals and sticks. That it sounds the way it is supposed
to sound,

The magic word is Flexibility and Adaptability. You have got to know the
styles and know in which setting you will end up. When playing in a
church you don't bring your loudest stuff and when playing in an Arena
it is another setting. You have to be prepared and think of everything
in advance. Who do I play with and what kind of music is it, more
classic, rock or play with click track, whatever.

**MS**: Be prepared so you can play in a way that they have trust in
what you do. Be prepared. I cannot do this without preparation. Listen
to recordings, ask for charts and be prepared. Than you can play with
conviction.

You have a rehearsal to rehearse, but I want to be able to play good at
the first rehearsal.

On drumming with orchestra. Volume:

**MS**: In this setting you just know: for starters don't play to loud.
You can say it is Metallica, but that is just a pity. If I play with the
volume they play on the records then the whole orchestra will run away
in three bars time. That is not possible.

It is not about volume, but intention, that you can play in the right
atmosphere and style and blend with the classical musicians. Adjust your
volume and groove. You can play with double bass drums but nobody is
going to hear anything anymore of the orchestra.

You simplify the original, but in a way it matches with the orchestra.

Some orchestral musicians assume when they see a drum set that is going
to sound loud and harsh. So I have to protect my ears and put plugs in.

On conductors and cooperation:

**MS**: When I entered the conductor came to me and said: "you are my
biggest support these days". That should be the other way around but you
see that a conductor is dependent on a drummer who knows what he is
doing. I tell the conductor:"I need you". We need each other, you have
to do it together. And sometimes it is push and pull.

When you notice that the orchestra is not able to play something in a
certain tempo, you can say; "fock it", but of course that is not the way
it works.

I made that mistake (25years ago) when I played with Rogier van Otterloo
(conductor of the Metropole Orchestra at that time). His face turned red
and I did not know what was happening. I played in the right tempo, but
it felt a little bit too fast, and because of that the strings could not
fit in all the sixteenth notes. That's why he was waving and indicate it
was supposed to be slower. But i did not realize it at the time.

I thought, who is the tight drummer here? I m not going to slow down
now.

He took me apart during the break. And he was absolutely right and
explained clearly that music is not one straight line but has to breath.
Not that you hear the tempo collapse, but you give it space to breath if
you take it a tiny bit slow so the orchestra is able to play it all.

**MA**: Can you explain more about not collapsing the tempo?

**MS**: Of course you can play on top, in the middle or behind the beat.
It is the same tempo but you pull it a little bit down. Then you get the
space so they can get the phrasing out, a little slower. You have room
to maneuver. When you go from a Bridge or A section to whatever you can
take the feel of the tempo, if the music asks for it, a little bit
faster or slower. You cannot do this when you play with a click. As long
as it does not feel slow or stringy it is okay, if the playing is tight.

**MS**: My classical experience is having snare drum lessons, no
orchestral experience. And taught myself how to play the drums.

The first time with strings and a conductor was with the Metropole
Academy and conductor Rogier van Otterloo. Rogier had a jazz background
so I could play on that. It was hard at the time but I managed quite
okay. Later on I did more productions with classical orchestras and
conductors. And sometimes did not understand what was going on. You
expect a 'one 'and then the orchestra play's late. You have to work
through that, await and learn how to approach that.

**MS**: When you play 'In the pocket' music it is more difficult. Where
to put the beat, It is hard, but again the magic word: Flexibility and
Adapt.

Use your ears and be aware of your surroundings. You have to be
concerned with what you play yourself. But technically you have to be
able to play on auto pilot. If you can do that you can focus on what is
going on around you. Your ears will open up and you hear so much more.
You can blend better. That is an essential skill for drummers. And this
is something is teach my students.

On communication

**MA**: Do you feel responsible for the tempo and that it feels good?

**MS**: Yes indeed. If I would play on and think: get lost, than there
will be friction. You have to find a way to find each other in a good
way.  When you feel the orchestra is dragging and inert like a dredger,
then you go and talk to the conductor You ask:"Do you also want me to
take it a bit slower or shall we give 'fire' to the orchestra? That is
communication. Some people find that hard to do but it is something you
can discuss. Sometimes people don\'t dare to approach you, but I don't
feel insulted. The way you approach someone is also important. If you do
it in an unsympathetic way than you think: get lost. But do it in a good
way and you will find common ground. It doesn\'t mean you are a bad
drummer. But if things musically don't work out you have to address the
issue.

On acoustic

**MA**: Do you feel the same push and pull outside this classical
setting?

**MS**: Yes sure. It is different with each band. Some are playing more
in front of the beat and some more behind. It also has to do with the
location. If you cannot hear each other, for example the brass players
and the rhythm section, they have the tendency to play behind. You feel
that immediately en have to search for each other. I also address that. 

On flexibility:

**MA**: Are you more flexible when you play with a symphonic orchestra
or when you play in another setting?

**MS**: Not in such a way, every day and every situation is different.
Sometimes you are lucky sometimes you don't and you have to be even more
flexible. Sometimes you are prepared, like here with the orchestra, I
expected it to be more difficult. There are a lot of notes written and
in a many different styles. When we started to play I felt it locked
already very good.

You can prepare as much as you can and listen to the originals as much
as you can. But this is totally different. You know the song and style,
but you don't know the intention and timing of the orchestra. That is an
uncertain factor.

On personality and professionalism:

**MS**: I grew up with playing lots of different things. I like that and
they ask me for that.

I think it is most important that people know what they get when they
ask you. There are an insane amount of drummers, playing faster or
louder, but that does not mean they function well. When people know, you
can call him, he has good sounding instruments, knows his parts, is well
dressed. Just the whole package. And communicated in a way that is
pleasant. There are drummers who cancel gigs on short notice or are
stubborn. People choose someone who is open and flexible. The whole
package is important. That sticks with the people who organize and
produce. 

On education:

**MA**: Do you think there are students at the conservatory's who are
able to play with an orchestra and conductor?

**MS**: Eventually yes, certainly concerning drum qualities. They have
what it take to do this. They only have to gain experience and you can't
practice that at school. That's the problem.

But some of them will be able to do this.

**MA**: Have you play Bernstein and/or Gershwin?

**MS**: A long time ago. It is classically written. That is difficult
because it is just a swing rhythm, but when you look at it you wonder
what it is? The classical notation makes it hard.

On drummer Skills Personality:

**MS**: A quality of a good drummers is their ability to take control in
a nice subtle way. But if it is not working out the way you want you
also have to have the capacity to really take the lead and play in
demand. Here is the beat and follow me.

**MA**: Would you do that in situations like this (orchestra)?

**MS**: Your flexibility can go a long way but there is a limit. You
think, until here and not any further.

**MA**: When the tempo is 10 beats to slow or the upbeat is not clear?

**MS**: Then I think: this is the tempo and play and see if the
orchestra is able to follow. The most important thing is how I sound
with the orchestra and not what the conductor is doing.

If you close your eyes, it is more important what you hear than what you
see.

You have to think it is not about me. It is about the music and I can
contribute my qualities. You have to go for the whole picture and not
because you are that insane drummer. In this case it is about Sven
Figee. He is the star of the evening en has to be happy what he hears
behind him.

The orchestra has to be happy because they can time together with me.
And if everybody is happy than I am still the one who makes it all
possible.

On drummers

**MS**: Groove, Beat, pulse and tempo is not coming from your hands. But
from the feet, especially the bass drum, that is your pulse.

**MA**: If you hear the orchestra is shifting do you play your bass drum
stronger?

**MS**: Never just the bass drum, I think and feel from my feet. I put
my hands on top of that and then you have it complete. If you notice
something is happening in the band with the timing, you don't play one
part of your drum set stronger. That absolutely has to be one thing.

Without the bass drum it sounds light. No body, no bottom. With your
hands you choose the color, the sauce.

Listen to the legends of the early years. Zutty Singleton, Baby Dods,
papa Joe Jones, Shelly Manne.

When you hear two drummers play well you think why does this one play
with so much depth? Because they think from the bass drum. Bottom sound
and not the top. That makes the difference.

On education:

**MA**: Do the classical students Amsterdam have drum lessons?

**MS**: No, there is no overlap there. Jazz drummers do have classical
percussion lessons. At a very high level and it is very important. For
reading and sound.

I try to play with a nice open technique. It sounds more musical.

Appendix J. Interview Arie den Boer
===================================

December 9, 2019. Between rehearsal and concert of the Residentie
Orchestra. Playing drums in a few sing and songwriter arrangements.

Translated by Martin Ansink from Dutch to English

Interviewer: Martin Ansink (MA)

Intervieuwee: Arie den Boer (AdB) Drummer

Arie den Boer studied percussion at the Conservatory of Rotterdam. He
plays and records in a diversity of bands and orchestras in a variety of
styles from classical to Jazz, pop, rock, funk, latin, balkan & world
music. Arie works with all the major symphonic orchestra's in the
Netherlands, including the Residence Orchestra, Radio Philharmonic
Orchestra and Belgrade Philharmonic. He is also performing with the
Metropole Orchestra and is a member of Slobodan Trkulja & Balkanopolis.
His experience includes jobs with Blue Man Group Amsterdam, Amsterdam
Percussion Group, Elvis Costello, Pat Metheny, Richard Bona and many
others.

On preparation:

**MA**: How do you prepare these parts:

**AdB**: When you know which pieces are programmed I make a Spotify
playlist.

So I can listen to the songs and their feel, style and tempo. So I can
get in to it. Parts are normally send late and this I can do without
parts. I try to approach the sound of the record.

Advise:

**Ma**: What would you advise someone who Is doing this for the first
time.

**AdB**: When I did this the first time, 30 years ago, when you enter
with your drum set people in the orchestra already thought it was too
loud. Make sure you blend in your surroundings. Play soft but with
dynamics and sound. Playing soft is an art in itself. 

And Listen!

 

On conductor and drummer:

**AdB**: You see the conductor and you hear what is going on around you.
And you maneuver in between. You are the time keeper but you can't just
play straight ahead and think: screw it, you have to follow me. That's
not how it works. You have to give and take between everything that is
going on around you.

This week with one of the pieces it was unclear. Than I can try to say,
this is the tempo, but if the bass players (orchestral) are thinking
something else. I question: Are they going to listen or go with the
conductor? Then I discuss this with the conductor because the most
important thing is the music. Getting it together and make everybody
happy.

Like you are the bus driver. Everybody is getting in the bus, but you
drive it. It is not something I do consciously. If it works out the
orchestra feels you are doing it together.

The line between the drummer and the conductor is very important. It is
about trust. The conductor must have faith in you. When they know you
and see you again they must think: 'This will be fine'. But if you don't
know each other, you have to find a way to make it work.

**MA**: Can you specify what they have to trust?

**AdB**: The drummer is the time keeper. And they should have the trust
that the orchestra will follow you. As the drummer you have to enforce
that they listen to you. But not by playing loud.

I had the experience that it did not work out, because the conductor did
not work together. Giving entrances at the wrong moment without contact
with the band. It resulted in wrong entrances during concerts.

A lot of classical conductors don't have a clue about tempo. When it is
84, don't give 82. 

It has to be spot one. I like to work with conductors who use a
metronome, or with in-ears, and when you start playing than the
metronome can stop. Than the train is running, and they can work on
other things, like helping the soloists entrance, than beating the bars.
They then have another function.

With orchestral intros it works differently and the conductor has to
make sure he has the right tempo when the band starts to play. If that
is not okay you have to force the tempo to be right and hope the
orchestra follows. Sometimes you can play an extra upbeat to help.

The orchestra's I work with get more and more acquainted with this kind
of playing. 

On in-ears:

**AdB**: In ears do help a lot, but you have to have a good sound
technician who now how it works.

I have my hi-hat low in the mix, mostly on the overhead so I hear the
natural dynamic.

It works very well with in-ears. It is great to be able to hear the harp
who is on the y other side of the stage

On experience:

**AdB**: I started with playing in wind bands when I was young and their
I learned what a conductor is doing and play accordingly. For a lot of
drummers it's hard to know what to do with a conductor or an orchestra
because they don't have that experience.

I'm glad I studied classical percussion also. So I have affinity with
classical music and how it works with, for instants, violin playing.

On flexibility:

**MA**: Are there more ensembles that you play with that requires this
amount of flexibility?

**AdB**: Because it is such a big group, you have to be very flexible.
When you play with a band you are more decisive and leading in you
playing. That is different.

On styles:

**AdB**: The drummer is the one with the most knowledge of the styles
and the parts. Being conscious of styles is very important. It has to
sound authentic. With the French songs we are doing now I can tell the
orchestra is really trying to get in my groove and play along.

During my whole live I listen to music a lot. And in all different
styles, from classical to jazz, 60's, just everything. I listened to how
it sounded and how it was played. When I studied I researched who
played. The Steve Gadd's, Vinnie Colaiuta's and Dave Weckl's. How did
they play and where did they get their inspiration from. The drummers
before them, and then I listened to those drummers, and so one. I also
read a lot about them. How did it sound back them, which instruments did
they use. And now with YouTube you can see also how their setups are and
how they moved. That is something I really like. Opposed to people who
think, this is the way I play and sound, regardless of the style. For me
the challenge is to play authentic as possible. And that is also what I
do in my profession, playing in all different kind of settings.

Appendix K. Interview Joost Gevers
==================================

Conductor. December 8 2019

Translated by Martin Ansink from Dutch to English

Interviewer: Martin Ansink (MA)

Interviewee: Joost Gevers (JGe) Conductor

Joost Geevers is a conductor, trombone player, composer and writer. He
studied at the Royal Conseravtory The Hague. As a guest conductor he
conducted the Residentie Orchestra, Nederlands Blazers Ensemble, Ives
Ensemble, Percussion the Hague, Aarhus Sinfonietta and many others. He
is co-founder and member of Fast Opera Productions and Neo-Fanfare 9x13.
As a musician/actor he worked with Ballet Orkest, Radio Filharmonisch
Orkest, Nationale Opera, Noord Nederlands Tonlee and Club Guy&Roni,

Since 2016 Joost is a teacher at Royal Conservatory the Hague and Codart
in Rotterdam.

On conductor and drummer

**JGe**: What I do is come to an agreement with the drummer on how to
begin. Sometimes when it starts with a couple of bars with only drums,
he starts on his own. But with some changes I want to give an upbeat. It
has to be clear to both of us who takes the initiative so we don't wait
on each other. And then you have one change to give an upbeat. 

Drummers normally know very well what the tempo should be. And then it
depends on who is drumming. You can't influence the drummer by beating
against his time but that is useless. I always go with the drummer.

On acoustics

**JGe**: Depending on how big the orchestra is and how well they can
hear each other I have two ways of dealing with this. If it is small and
everybody hears each other acoustically. And If they can\'t hear it I
beat with the drummer.

As a conductor it is hard to hear the percussion. you hear the principal
strings loudly. When you can just hear the wind players, than you now it
is balanced in the hall. You hear the percussion but hard to follow and
difficult to get everybody along.

I did a piece which had a castagnettes pattern in ⅝ bars and difficult
rhythms in the strings. You can count on the percussion players to play
straight on in tempo. If that is not the case you are helpless as a
conductor.

On conductor

**MA**: Is your conducting then more tight and with more puls?

**JGe**: Yes, normally, without a drummer, you conduct a little before
the orchestra. But then I make sure it is exactly with the drummer. And
then ask the orchestra to really time with the drummer. Otherwise it is
possible that the drummer is also reacting on my reaction to the
orchestra. I try to get the two in line. If something, for instance
tempo, I talk with the drummer. Almost never with movements. I'll stop
and address it. And with the most drummers that works.

**MA**:Is it something you learn in your conducting lessons? 

**JGe**: No that is not in the lessons. Maybe because I am an orchestral
musician myself that I understand how it works. During the lessons they
tell you to take the lead, otherwise you are not a conductor. Show you
have a function.

And with these things you search for what your function is. I see it as:
organizing and coordinating. It is a big advantage that you have a
drummer. Keeping Tempo is out of your 

hands and you have time for a lot of other things instead of keeping
things together.

I think every conductor who is doing these kind of programs is worrying
and hopes the drummer is good. The drummer is acoustically the most
powerful.

On Communication:

**JGe**: before the first rehearsal start I always go to the drummer and
say something like: 'I', glad that you are here. It makes my life much
easier. Then he knows I give him responsibility and he can take
initiative.

If it doesn't work out in the rehearsal I will talk to him.

On cooperation

**MA**: Are there more occasions that require the same kind of
cooperation?

**JGe**: Yes, most of the time with percussion. If you do the Bolero you
also don't get in the way. Or the snare drum part at the end of the
Symphonic Dances from Rachmaninov. I try to get the same co-creation.
You only conduct more symphonically. That means the whole orchestra
speaks the same language and it is less beat/pulse related conducting.
But I try to conduct in a way that the orchestra also listens to the
snare.

I don't look at the drummer al the time, but with every transition I see
that Marcel Serierse makes eye contact. That makes it very easy.

When classical orchestral percussionist play the drum set it is
sometimes different because some of them are used to get the entrance,
upbeat and tempo's from the conductor. And sometimes they want me to
give the tempo's. Than this becomes my responsibility. They are less
determinative. And I try to get them to do it. The orchestra will follow
the drummer anyway, I am not going to do anything.

On Tempo

**MA**: Do you use a metronome?

**JGe**: I almost never use a metronome. And sometimes I'm off tempo.

On Bernstein/Gershwin

**JGe**: I think Gershwin and Bernstein is more difficult. You have a
lot of player playing difficult things which they are not always used
to. And then you have the percussion as real percussion. With the
acoustics and distance it is less compelling. With the jazz/soul/pop it
is more clear.

With Bernstein and Gershwin you have to lead a little bit more as a
conductor. And get everybody to hear the percussion is the same way.
That are difficult things. There are two worlds who make a new world. 

Advise:

**MA**: What advice would you give to a drummer?

**JGe**: Don't wait and see, but take initiative. Take your role. Be the
timekeeper just as in a band, it's just bigger. Otherwise the conductor
waits.

Know your tempo's and know the pieces. Most of the time the drummers
know best.

Appendix L. Interview during lessons Jim Gwin
=============================================

This is a summary of 6 hours of drum lessons and interview I had with
Jim Gwin on May 16, 17 and 18 of 2019. We had the lesson in a room at
the New England Conservatory in Boston (MA)

We worked on some of the existing parts of Bernstein and Gershwin and
reflected on the rehearsal and concert Jim played, and I watched, with
the Boston Pops Orchestra that week.

Interviewer: Martin Ansink (MA)

Interviewee: Jim Gwin (JG) Drummer

On choice of Instruments:

We talked about the choice of setup for BSO programs related to the
styles. Because of the diversity of these programs with pieces of
different time periods you have to find a set which is 'in the middle'.
You try to be authentic if possible. For a Beatles program you try to
use bigger drums and lower tuning than playing a complete jazz oriented
program. 

Drums sound always bad when playing outside.

On interpretation and preparation:

**JG**: Listen to the songs they send you. Figure out what to do. When
played live the songs are probably played faster than in the studio
recording. I don't know but I think because of energy. Be prepared for
this, I do write it in the parts for next time. Keep an open mind and
keep learning.

**MA**: What do you do when dealing with original parts which have
overdubs?

**JG**: You can't play that by your own. Make up something different. I
have to do that a lot of times. Get the feel, but don't get all the
details.

I had to play on V-drums and I didn't know anything about that. I got
them a week before and worked it out,. The arranger wanted a particular
sound. At the rehearsal they didn't turn on the headphones and I and the
rest of the band couldn't hear what I was doing. I had to play the rest
program also on this thing, but I would not do that, I can't play In the
Mood on these things.

On conductor, drummer and soloist

Jim reflects on the relationship between drummer, guest artist and
conductor.

**JG**: It is about connection, trust and communication. Sometimes you
have to be in charge and sometimes you have to let things happen and
slide around. Sometimes you just can't fix it. If things go bad you just
have to simplify and play louder.

Keith Lockhart (conductor BPO) uses a metronome when the artist is
particular about the tempo, or checks with Jim before starting. J.G.:
"You've got to know what the groove is before you start. Know at what
tempo it feels best. If the singer starts you can tell immediately if
they want it slower or faster, they don't even know that they are doing
it. You can tell if they are comfortable, Adjust, Don't Fight"

Some soloists are particular and do want to have exact tempos. If that
is the case I do use a metronome.

On drummer and orchestra

**JG**: Orchestra is the hardest thing, it's like a different animal,
that like people that are playing stuff but don't have any idea how it
is supposed to sound like. They don't know what swing is, you have to
give the illusion that it sounds good. An orchestra is never gone swing
like a band. With a 'good' band it's easy. The time is so good that you
don't have to worry about holding it together. You can concentrate on
feel. Orchestral timing is all over the place. It never settles.

There are some younger guys who can do it. And also improvise.

I Normally play my bass drum soft but bass players in the orchestra can
be far away, I can't hear them anyway, so I play the bass drum louder.
It sounds obnoxious. This is not necessary when there is a band bass
player and he is good.

On communication

**JG**: Keith Lockhart trusts me to do the right thing. We work with
other guest conductors and that is more difficult. Especially the
beginning of the pieces. I go and talk to them and ask them to give me
three, four. I go up to them after the rehearsal or in the break. Most
of the times that works, if they don't want to do that it is a disaster.
Then I try to figure out where the entrance of the beat is. When it is a
groove, you have to know what the groove is before you start. It is not
Mahler. Give a count-in.

On acoustics

**JG**: They put the drums inside a Plexiglas box for the sound. That
makes it very hard for me to hear the orchestra without monitoring. It
is important to be in the right spot to be able to hear everything what
is going around you. They don't always want you to move during a
concert, but that should happen sometimes.

On musical Skills

**JG**: Play with as much feel as you can and in the right style. Have a
specific drummer in mind when you play a beat. The feet (hi-hat and the
bass drum) are the basis of the beat. And the anchor for the orchestra.
Your right foot is the whole thing. And left too, but more right. Focus
on that. The other stuff will fall into place. I always think about that
more than the rest. Start a piece with a 'big bang'. So everyone knows
where the 'one' is.

If the orchestra start shifting of the beat, simplify your beat and I do
play the bass drum a little stronger

On Fills: you have to make a crescendo when you go down. Something that
is higher can be softer than lower tuned toms.

On technical skills

**JG**: I care about feel and sound. Nothing else, I don't care about
technique. If I feel I'm struggling when I'm playing I'm concentrating
too much on what I'm doing. Let things happen.

I love Steve Gadd, he lets it happen. Famous quote: "I let the music
play me"

On personal skills

**JG**: Listening skills are important. You are the determining factor
of the rhythm section. Every change goes through you. Be flexible and
make the soloist, other players, play better. Catch them if necessary.

Be nice to people. I don't want to make anybody upset, I doesn't help
anything.

Last night there was a pattern I had to play together with the piano
player in front of the orchestra. But they forgot to turn my monitor on.
I told them to put it up, but he said: "just follow the stick". It's
terrible but I let it go, and remind them next time.

On education:

Jim did not have drum lessons, only classical percussion. He played
drums from 5 years old. And played a lot of wedding gigs from the age of
13.

**JG**: You learn a lot, especially what not to do. You play too much
and they say: "don\'t!"

Tips:

**JG**: Practice with play along: Meet the bass player, Oscar Peterson
trio (no drums) (For example: Stan Getz and the Oscar Peterson trio
1958)

References:

We listened to drummers that Jim listens and refers to when interpreting
the drum part.

He tries to get the right feel for any song and copies their style.
Sometimes even special gestures like the raised shoulder of Bernard
Purdie when he plays a shuffle.

For the feel of "On the Town" by Gershwin het uses Apple Honey by Woody
Herman and his Thundering Herds record with Davey Tough, a favorite of
Buddy Rich and Gene Krupa, on drums. J.G: "He plays underneath but so
strong".

Other references for Rock songs for getting the right feel and sound
are: Rock Steady from Aretha Franklin and O-o-h Child Five by
Stairsteps.

We listened and compared different recordings of the West Side Story and
Jim explained and showed the way he interprets these parts. The result
of this can be found in [Chapter
6](#interpretation-and-preparation-of-parts) Interpretation and
Preparations of parts.

[]{#_Toc38200943 .anchor}**Bibliography\
**

Abel Mark (2014) Chapter1 *What is Groove*

Barrett (2000)

Beckett (2008) *Quality management practice*

Blades, J.(Revised Edition 1992). *Percussion Instruments and their
History.* Westport Connecticut, The Bolt Strummer, LTD

Bleu Monday (Opera) in Wikipedia: Retrieved October 26, 2019
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Monday_(opera)>

Bougon et al. (1977)

Conductor in Wikipedia. retrieved October 20, 2019
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conducting>

Doleac, Benjamin, *Ethnomusicology review*, Western Musical Notation
volume 18 (2013)
*[[https://www.ethnomusicologyreview.ucla.edu/journal/volume/18/piece/699]{.underline}](https://www.ethnomusicologyreview.ucla.edu/journal/volume/18/piece/699)
, retrieved [ ]{.underline} nov 13 2019*

Duguid (2005). *The art of knowing*

Dunbar, B. (2017).*Versatility in the Percussion section*. Percussive
Notes September

Duque, J. (2017). *The Drummer's role* Kindle edition

Feather, L. (1957.) *The Book of Jazz.* New York: Horizon Press

Gottlieb, D. (2010). *The Evolution of Jazz Drumming*. Milwaukee, Hudson
Music LLC

Hager, P. and Johnssona, Mary C. (Received 23 October 2008; final
version received 31 March 2009). *Learning to become a professional
orchestral musician: going beyond skill and technique*. Published in
Journal of Vocational Education and Training 61(2):

Hatch, M.J. (1999) *Empty spaces of Organizing*

Kate Rigs Permalink. (2012). *Open Culture*, September 4, on Thelonious
Monk [ ]{.underline}
[**http://www.openculture.com/2012/09/thelonious\_monk\_scribbles\_a\_list\_of\_tips\_for\_playing\_a\_gig.html**](http://www.openculture.com/2012/09/thelonious_monk_scribbles_a_list_of_tips_for_playing_a_gig.html)
Retrieved January 7, 2020

King, B. (February 1, 2009). *La Scena Musicale* [\"American symphonic
jazz: an excursion into the geography of
music\"](http://www.scena.org/lsm/sm6-5/jazz.html). Retrieved January 7,
2020 <http://www.scena.org/lsm/sm6-5/jazz.html>

Koivunen, N. (2002). *Organizational Music the Role of Listening in
Interaction Processes*

Koivunen, N (2003). *Leadership in symphony Orchestra's*

Krogh (von), Ichijo and Nonaka (2000). *Enabling knowledge creation*

Ludwig Sr, William F. "67 Years of drum Pedals" The Ludwig drummer
(Spring 1962).

Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) The knowledge creating company

Nordström (1997). [***Kaikki
musiikista***](https://scholar.google.nl/scholar?cluster=1162185501883312528&hl=nl&as_sdt=2005&sciodt=0,5)
(p 110)

Origin and Chart Information: (2005). *I Got Rhythm.* JazzStandards.com.
Retrieved January 7 2020 .
<http://www.jazzstandards.com/compositions-0/embraceableyou.htm>

Polanyi (1983)

Ragtime. in Wikipedia, retrieved September 12, 2019 from:
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ragtime>

Schultz, T. (1979)., *A History of Jazz drumming*. Percussive notes 16,
no 3.

Scott, J. (2009). *Gids voor drummers*. Veltman uitgevers, Netherlands.
Original title: Learn to play drums, Chartwell Books, Inc. (2008)

Spagnardi, R. (August 1, 2000). *The Big Band Drummer: A Complete
Workbook for Improving Big Band Drumming Performance*. Modern Drummer
Publications; Spi edition

West Side Story Archives: *Shelly Manne*[,]{.underline} retrieved
November 13, 2019. <https://www.westsidestory.com/credits>

Wigglesworth, M. (2018). *The Silent Musician* London, UK, Faber &
Faber.

**Bibliography Video**

Gustavo Morales Battaglini. (Oktober 17, 2017) West Side Story Original
Soundtrack GMB West Side story Orchestra, Johnny Green. Retrieved
January 7, 2019 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7OHCrp13Ho>

Kadoguy, (December 4, 2016). George Gershwin's Blue Monday" (radio
premiered 1954). Retrieved January 7, 2020.
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEIpWU47GLw]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEIpWU47GLw)

Pritch818, (November 30, 2018). Bernstein in World of Jazz FB. Retreived
January 7 2020.
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pisSH7X09Ac]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pisSH7X09Ac)

70Tamas, (July 20, 2010). Gershwin Porgy and Bess - A Woman is a
sometime thing. Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldPuFA0PG8k>

70Tamas, (July 20, 2010). Gershwin Porgy and Bess - Oh I can't sit down.
Retrieved January 7, 2020. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtqDjCPqrIw>

70Tamas, (July 2, 2010) Gershwin: Porgy and Bess -There\'s a boat dat\'s
leaving soon for New York (Damon Evans). Retrieved January 7, 2020
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lh5ijrsHx5Q>

70Tamas, (July 1, 2010). Gershwin: Porgy and Bess - Oh Lawd, I\'m on my
way (Willard White) Retrieved January 7, 2020
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ptttSZfT6M>

Visilab, (April 30, 2009). It ain't necessarily so from Porgy and Bess,
Retrieved on January 7, 2020
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kP5O_NUhrK0>

Varadero1839, (October 6, 2009) What you want with Bess? -- Gregg Baker
and Cynthia Haymon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-IhpO4NiMg>

Varadero1839, (October 9, 2009). A Red-Headed Woman - Gregg Baker and
company. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Am6L7X3GlYo>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 2 2012). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes: Prelude: Daa-Doa Day ... Mornin'Sun Kisses the
Window, Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-drPgEtRTFU>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 18 2018). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes: I. How could you say the thing that you did,

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6gdMWjTOFjg>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 18 2018). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes : II. Yes? Oh mister Partridge. Retrieved January 7,
2020

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GpiFs8YYTs>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 18 2018). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes: VI. What a movie scene. Retrieved January 7, 2020
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btAAj90c4DM>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 18 2018). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes : V. There is a law. Retrieved January 7, 2020
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X8ZvuiQxVXU>

Leonard Bernstein -- Onderwerp. (January 18 2018). Trouble in Tahiti
--Opera in 7 Scenes: VII. Evenin' shadows are spreadin' softly Retrieved
January 7, 2020 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVGWSdnxpwA>

Classical Records. (July 18 2011). Bernstein Conducts Bernstein -- On
the Town (Ballet Music). Retrieved January 7, 2020.
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A2glmS40fJ4]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A2glmS40fJ4)

Edo de Waart -- Onderwerp. (April 10 2017). On the Town -- 3 dance
Episodes: I. The Great Lover. Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjxqZKWOxKg>

Edo de Waart -- Onderwerp. (April 10 2017). On the Town -- 3 dance
Episodes: 3. The Great Lover. Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drhKq0Eawzk>

Sonny Beech. (January 1, 2012). Bernstein, L. -- Dance Episodes from 'On
the Town'- 1. The Great Lover[.]{.underline} Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kTpa3MKBCgE>

Sonny Beech. (January 1, 2012). Bernstein, L. -- Dance Episodes from 'On
the Town'- 3. The Great Lover[.]{.underline} Retrieved January 7, 2020.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G7UlCYj0El0>

Ofir. 18 (November 2011). West Side story - Simon Bolivar Youth
Orchestra of Venezuela -- Dudamel 2007. Retrieved November 6, 2019

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UjNi1dkvTcw>

**Bibliography Audio**

Spotify, (2006). EMI Records Ltd/Virgin Classics. City of Birmingham
Symphony orchestra, Paavo Järvi. 1998 Symphonic Dance of West Side
Story. Retrieved November 6, 2019

Spotify, (1964). Sony BMG Music Entertainment New York Philharmonic,
Leonard Bernstein. Original released 1961. Symphonic Dances of West Side
Story Retrieved November 6 2019.

Spotify, Transart Live. David Wroe and Orchestre National de Lille,
Gershwin: Porgy and Bess: A Symphonic Picture. Retreived January 7, 2020

[^1]: <https://www.residentieorkest.nl/en/>

[^2]: <https://www.residentieorkest.nl/en/symphonic-junction/>

[^3]:  In the standard symphonic orchestral repertoire regarded as
    standard percussion instruments are: timpani, snare drum, bass drum
    and cymbals. Mallet instruments: xylophone, glockenspiel, vibraphone
    and small auxiliary instruments like triangle, tambourine and
    castagnettes.

[^4]: Versatility in the Percussion section by Braham Dunbar. Percussive
    Notes September 2017

[^5]: The Boston Pops Orchestra is an American orchestra based in
    Boston, Massachusetts that specializes in playing light classical
    and popular music. The Boston Pops was founded in 1885 as a second,
    popular identity of the Boston Symphony Orchestra (BSO) Consisting
    primarily of musicians from the BSO, the orchestra performs a Spring
    season of popular music and a holiday program in December.
    Identified with its long-time director Arthur Fiedler, in the past
    the orchestra has recorded extensively, made frequent tours, and
    appeared regularly on television. The Pops Spring and Holiday
    seasons allowed the BSO to become one of the first American
    orchestras to provide year-round employment for its musicians.

    The current Music Director of the Boston Pops is Keith Lockhart.
    <https://www.bso.org/Home>

[^6]: Boston Pops Esplanade Orchestra is similar to the BPO, only also
    consisting of other non Boston Symphony Orchestra Members.

[^7]: New England Conservatory <https://necmusic.edu/>

[^8]: [Appendix G. My observations on rehearsals and
    concerts](#appendix-g.-my-observations-on-rehearsals-and-concerts)

[^9]: [Appendix L. Interview during lessons Jim
    Gwin](#appendix-l.-interview-during-lessons-jim-gwin)

[^10]: [Summary of the necessary technical and musical
    demands](#summary-of-the-necessary-technical-and-musical-demands)

[^11]: The greats: *The drummers who took a big part in the evolution of
    drums and are an inspiration for all other drummers*

[^12]: "The Drummer's role" by Jose Roman Duque p 77- 134 Kindle edition
    (2017)

[^13]: Abel Mark 2014 Chapter 1 What is Groove, p 14

[^14]: [Appendix H. Interview Hans
    Leenders](#appendix-h.-interview-hans-leenders) [Appendix K.
    Interview Joost Gevers](#appendix-k.-interview-joost-gevers)

[^15]: Wikipedia, September 12, 2019

[^16]: Schultz, Thomas, A History of Jazz drumming. Percussive notes 16,
    no 3 (1979). p 106 - 132

[^17]: William F. Ludwig, Sr. "67 Years of drum Pedals" The Ludwig
    drummer, Spring 1962. p 5-7

[^18]: Blades, James, Percussion Instruments and their History. p 459

[^19]: Gottlieb, Danny, The Evolution of Jazz Drumming. p 23

[^20]: Schultz, Thomas, A History of Jazz drumming. Percussive notes 16,
    no 3 (1979). p 106 - 132

[^21]: Feather, Leonard, *The Book of Jazz* (New York: Horizon Press,
    1957). p 124.

[^22]: Scott, Justin, Gids voor drummers, Veltman uitgevers, Netherlands
    (2009). Original title: Learn to play drums, Chartwell Books, Inc.
    (2008)

[^23]: Schultz, Thomas, A History of Jazz drumming. Percussive notes 16,
    no 3 (1979). p 106 - 132

[^24]: Origin and Chart Information: I Got Rhythm.\" JazzStandards.com,
    2005. Retrieved January 7, 2020
    <http://www.jazzstandards.com/compositions-0/embraceableyou.htm>

[^25]: Schultz, Thomas, A History of Jazz drumming. Percussive notes 16,
    no 3 (1979). p 106 - 132

[^26]: Blue Monday. Premiered in 1954 on NBC Radio.
    [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEIpWU47GLw]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEIpWU47GLw)

[^27]:  King, Betty (2009-02-01*). [\"American symphonic jazz: an
    excursion into the geography of
    music\"](http://www.scena.org/lsm/sm6-5/jazz.html). *La Scena
    Musicale *Retrieved 2009-11-22.*
    <http://www.scena.org/lsm/sm6-5/jazz.html>

[^28]: Bleu Monday <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Monday_(opera)>
    retrieved October 26, 2019

[^29]: Bernstein in World of Jazz on ABC in 1955.
    [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pisSH7X09Ac]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pisSH7X09Ac)

[^30]: Shelly Manne [https://www.westsidestory.com/credits retrieved
    November
    15](https://www.westsidestory.com/credits%20retrieved%20November%2015),
    2019.

[^31]: Gottlieb, Danny, The Evolution of Jazz Drumming. p 96

[^32]: Hybrid parts: They require playing drum set and other classical
    percussion instruments in the same part.

[^33]: <https://www.berklee.edu/>

[^34]: <https://necmusic.edu/>

[^35]: 2019-2020: Royal Conservatory The Hague (Jazz drum lessons in
    BA). Codarts Rotterdam (Not standard included). Conservatory of
    Amsterdam (Not standard included). Hanze Prins Claus Conservatoire
    Groningen (two years in BA course) Artez Academy of Music in Arnhem,
    Zwolle en Enschede (during whole BA course). Conservatorium
    Maastricht (not standard included).

[^36]: Wikipedia 20-10-2019

[^37]: Koivunen 2003 Leadership in symphony Orchestras, p 67

[^38]: AbelMark 2014

[^39]: Koivunen 2002 Organizational Music the Role of Listening in
    Interaction Processes, p 102

[^40]: *Published in Journal of Vocational Education and Training 61(2):
    103--118. Learning to become a professional orchestral musician:
    going beyond skill and technique Paul Hager∗a and Mary C. Johnssona
    a Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, University of Technology,
    Sydney Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, UTS, P.O. Box 123,
    Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia. (Received 23 October 2008; final
    version received 31 March 2009)*

[^41]: The Drummer's role - J.Duque

[^42]: Marie Jo Hatch 1999, pp. 79--81

[^43]: [**http://www.openculture.com/2012/09/thelonious\_monk\_scribbles\_a\_list\_of\_tips\_for\_playing\_a\_gig.html**](http://www.openculture.com/2012/09/thelonious_monk_scribbles_a_list_of_tips_for_playing_a_gig.html)

[^44]: book The Big Band Drummer: A Complete Workbook for Improving Big
    Band Drumming Performance, Ron Spagnardi

[^45]: Spotify, 1964 Sony BMG Music Entertainment New York Philharmonic,
    Leonard Bernstein. Original released 1961. Symphonic Dances of West
    Side Story Retrieved November 6 2019.

[^46]: [Summary of the necessary technical and musical
    demands](#summary-of-the-necessary-technical-and-musical-demands)

[^47]: Wigglesworth, M. (2018) The Silent Musician London, UK, Faber &
    Faber. P 70

[^48]: Sonny Beech. January 1, 2012. Bernstein, L. -- Dance Episodes
    from 'On the Town'- . The Great Lover[.]{.underline} Retrieved
    January 7, 2020. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G7UlCYj0El0>

[^49]: *[<https://www.ethnomusicologyreview.ucla.edu/journal/volume/18/piece/699>
    retrieved]{.underline} November 13, 2019*

[^50]: Edo de Waart -- Onderwerp. April 10 2017. On the Town -- 3 dance
    Episodes: 3. The Great Lover. Retrieved January 7, 2020.
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drhKq0Eawzk>

[^51]: Sonny Beech. January 1, 2012. Bernstein, L. -- Dance Episodes
    from 'On the Town'- 3. The Great Lover[.]{.underline} Retrieved
    January 7, 2020. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G7UlCYj0El0>

[^52]: Video of Mel Lewis master class in Hilversum, The Netherlands.
    1985
